BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY: APPLIED DATA ANALYSIS USING NATIONAL HEALTH SURVEYS

TIFFANY B. KINDRATT


OVERVIEW
National data sets provide an avenue for students to
practice data analytic skills while also answering
meaningful research questions. This open education
resource was developed to train future public health
professionals how to conduct secondary data analysis of
national health surveys using SAS statistical software.
SAS software was selected because it is one of the most
commonly used software programs used among public
health departments and academia. The book includes
details on how to analyze public use data from five
common national health surveys, including the National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS), Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey (MEPS), Health Information National
Trends Survey (HINTS), Behavior Risk Factor
Surveillance System (BRFSS) and National Health and
Nutrition and Examination Survey (NHANES). All
datasets and corresponding syntax files are available from
the Open ICPSR Data Repository (https:  doi.org 
10.3886 E172301V1). Future steps are to provide
databases and syntax files for other analytic software,
specifically STATA.
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY IX

CREATION PROCESS
The creation of this textbook began in March 2020. Due
to COVID 19 pandemic challenges on teaching and
research in higher education, final production was
delayed. Chapters 1 8 were piloted during Spring 2021
and Chapters 1 6 and 9 12 were piloted in Spring 2022
to Master of Public Health students enrolled in KINE
5386 Big Data for Epidemiology. Revisions were ongoing
throughout the development process. Any corrections
from the Spring 2021 pilot were made prior to the Spring
2022 pilot. Efforts are underway for additional reviews to
be completed by a consultant, Peace Ossom Williamson,
MLA.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Tiffany B. Kindratt, PhD, MPH, is an assistant professor
in the Public Health Program, Department of
Kinesiology, College of Nursing and Health Innovation
at the University of Texas at Arlington. She is Director
of the Health Survey Research Laboratory and conducts
research focused on predisposing (e.g. race ethnicity,
specifically Arab Middle Eastern and North African) and
enabling (e.g. patient provider communication, patient
experiences) factors that influence individualsb^@^Y health
behaviors, morbidity, mortality and use of health services
across the life course using big data methodologies. She
has an extensive background in epidemiologic and large
database analysis, Arab Middle Eastern and North
African American health disparities, and training of
medical learners. She has 13 years of experience
analyzing large databases and complex surveys, including
those included in this book. She currently has federal
X TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

research funding from the National Institutes of Health
(National Institute on Aging) and Health Resources and
Services Administration and has over 50 manuscripts
published in peer reviewed scientific journals.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY XI

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

UTA CARES GRANT PROGRAM
Creation of this OER was funded by the UTA CARES
Grant Program, which is sponsored by UTA Libraries.
Under the auspices of UTAb^@^Ys Coalition for Alternative
Resources in Education for Students (CARES), the grant
program supports educators interested in practicing
open education through the adoption of OER and, when
no suitable open resource is available, through the
creation of new OER or the adoption of library licensed
or other free content. Additionally, the program
promotes innovation in teaching and learning through
the exploration of open educational practices, such as
collaborating with students to produce educational
content of value to a wider community. Information
about the grant program and funded projects is available
online.
AUTHORb^@^YS NOTE
The case studies developed in Chapter 6, National Health
Interview Survey, and Chapter 9, Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System were supported by the National
Institute On Aging of the National Institutes of Health
XII BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY

under Award Numbers
P30
AG059300
and
R03AG070177. The content is solely the responsibility of
the authors and does not necessarily represent the official
views of the National Institutes of Health.b^@^]
I would like to acknowledge, Dr. Erin Carlson, who
is the Director of Graduate Public Health Programs at
the University of Texas at Arlington. Dr. Carlson was
integral in making my dream of creating this textbook
in alignment with a Master of Public Health Big Data
for Epidemiology course (KINE 5386) a reality. I would
also like to acknowledge Dr. David Keller, Professor,
Associate Dean, and Chair of Department of Kinesiology
for his support of my research and teaching endeavors.
I would like to acknowledge Dr. Bijal Balasubramanian,
who served as my PhD advisor and mentor, who allowed
me to create an independent study focused on analyzing
national data at UTHealth, School of Public Health
Regional Campus. Finally, I would like to acknowledge
Dr. Florence J. Dallo, who served as my Master of Public
Health advisor and mentor, who piqued my interest in
analyzing national health data.
On a personal note, I would like to acknowledge my
husband, Tony, for his love and support during the
writing and publishing of this textbook. I would like to
acknowledge my two sons, Cameron and Maxwell, one
of whom was born during the writing of this textbook.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge my parents, Diane
and Gary Billmeier. This publication would not be
possible without the love and support of them all.
LEAD AUTHOR
Tiffany B. Kindratt, PhD, MPH b^@^S Assistant Professor,
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY XIII

Public Health, Department of Kinesiology, College of
Nursing and Health Innovation, University of Texas at
Arlington.

XIV TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

1.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this textbook is to train future public
health professionals, specifically Master of Public Health
(MPH) students, how to conduct basic applied data
analysis using secondary data collected from national
health surveys. This textbook helps to eliminate gaps in
knowledge, skills and analytical abilities that may
prohibit MPH graduates from being successful in entrylevel public health practice and research focused
positions. A recent study of local health departments
demonstrated that entry level public health professionals
lacked the knowledge, skills and abilities for data
collection, database management, data cleaning,
quantitative data analysis statistics, and data analysis
using SAS statistical software.1 Using publicly available
data from national health surveys, this textbook will
allow students to learn and practice data analytic skills
with SAS statistical software to answer general
surveillance and analytical research questions in
preparation for their future public health practices.
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 1

1.2 HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH FOCUS
The examples used in this textbook stem from previous
studies and the current research laboratory focus of its
primary author, Tiffany Kindratt, PhD, MPH. Established
in Fall 2019, Dr. Kindrattb^@^Ys Health Survey Research (HSR)
Lab is housed in the Public Health Program, Department
of Kinesiology, College of Nursing and Health Innovation
at the University of Texas at Arlington. The goal of the
HSR lab is to conduct epidemiologic research studies
focused on evaluating predisposing and enabling factors
that influence individualsb^@^Y health behaviors, morbidity,
mortality and use of health services with big data
methodologies. This includes the secondary analysis of
large national health surveys that use complex samples,
such as the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS),
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), Health
Information National Trends Survey (HINTS), American
Community Survey (ACS), and others. Another goal of
this lab is to collaborate with multidisciplinary teams and
contribute to research studies designed to 1) train and
mentor future public health and medical professionals
and 2) implement community based participatory
research and quality improvement methodologies in
community and clinical settings.
The HSR labb^@^Ys research focus was developed to cover a
wide range of epidemiology outcomes and contributing
factors using Andersenb^@^Ys model of health services as its
guiding framework.2 Race, ethnicity, place of birth, and
geographic context (urban or rural) disparities are
evaluated to determine how individual predisposing
factors contribute to health outcomes. Dr. Kindrattb^@^Ys
research incorporates the examination of health
2 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

disparities among Arab Americans, comprising of either
born or tracing heritage to the Middle East or North
Africa, who are largely underrepresented in health
research because they are classified as non Hispanic
Whites by the United States (US) federal government.3
The labb^@^Ys research focus extends Andersenb^@^Ys model by
incorporating patient experiences as contextual enabling
factors of health services utilization and evaluating
morbidity and mortality outcomes. Patient experiences
that are examined include self reports of qualities and
modes of patient provider communication, patientprovider gender and race concordance, care
coordination, and provider satisfaction.
1.3 OUTLINE OF TEXTBOOK CHAPTERS
This textbook is separated into four sections, including:
1) introduction to national health surveys; 2) basic
applied data analysis; 3) common national health surveys;
and 4) dissemination and conclusions.
1.3.1 TEXTBOOK SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION
TO NATIONAL HEALTH SURVEYS
The first section includes three chapters. Chapter 1
provides an overview of the textbook by outlining its
purpose to train future public health professionals in the
knowledge and skills to conduct applied secondary data
analysis using national health surveys. Chapter 2 provides
a general overview of the surveys used for the case studies
presented in this textbook. The national surveys used for
the case studies include the NHIS in Chapter 6, the MEPS
in Chapter 7, the HINTS in Chapter 8, the Behavior Risk
Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) in Chapter 9, and
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 3

the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) in Chapter 10. Chapter 3 includes a literature
review of previous studies that have used national health
surveys to answer public health and health services
related research questions that align with the case studies
in each chapter.
1.3.2 TEXTBOOK SECTION 2: BASIC APPLIED
DATA ANALYSIS
The second section includes two chapters. Chapter 4
reviews basic statistical functions commonly used for
public health and health services research questions. It is
expected that students who use this textbook will have
some background knowledge of research methods and
study design; however, this chapter includes some basics
for students who do not have a strong foundation in
research methodology. Chapter 4 includes basic
terminology on types of data collected, descriptive,
(frequencies, percentages, means, standard deviations)
and analytical statistical procedures (chi square, logistic
regression) used for analysis of national health surveys.
Chapter 5 includes details on additional survey design
features that need to be considered when analyzing
complex surveys. These include using procedures like
PROC SURVEYFREQ, including weights, primary
sampling units, and stratum variables. SAS programming
examples will be used with NHIS data in these chapters.
1.3.3 TEXTBOOK SECTION 3: COMMON
NATIONAL HEALTH SURVEYS
The third section includes five chapters dedicated to
common national health surveys used for secondary data
4 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

analysis among public health and health services research
professionals. Chapters provide:
1. A general overview of the survey and what it is
used for;
2. An overview of the data files available;
3. Advantages of the survey;
4. Disadvantages of the survey;
5. Practical tips for conducting the analysis; and
6. Case study using a national health survey.
Each case study presents 1) a brief gap in the literature
that the case study is attempting to address and 2) a
research question. The case studies will outline the
required steps to download, merge, create recoded
(dummy) variables and analyze each dataset to answer
research question. Sample SAS syntax will be provided.
Chapter 6 covers the NHIS. The objective of the NHIS
survey case study is to explore whether Arab American 
Middle Eastern or North African (MENA) adults are
more or less likely to receive an annual flu vaccine in
comparison to other racial ethnic groups, such as other
non Hispanic Whites. To answer this research question,
2018 NHIS person and sample adult files will be
analyzed. Chapter 7 covers the MEPS. The objective of
the MEPS survey case study is to explore whether adults
who perceived their health care provider provided quality
communication during their visits over the last 12
months are more or less likely to receive an annual flu
vaccine in comparison those who did not receive quality
patient provider communication. To answer this
research question, 2017 and 2018 MEPS household level
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 5

in person and self administered questionnaire data will
be analyzed. Chapter 8 covers the HINTS. The objective
of the HINTS survey case study is to explore associations
between electronic patient provider communication and
colon cancer screening uptake using HINTS 5 Cycle 3
data. Chapter 9 covers the BRFSS. The objective of the
BRFSS survey case study is to explore how differences in
caregiving experiences among urban and rural adults in
Texas are moderated by race and ethnicity. To answer this
research question, 2019 BRFSS state level data will be
analyzed. Chapter 10 covers the NHANES. The objective
of the NHANES survey case study is to estimate and
compare sedentary behavior guideline adherence among
US  and foreign born adults by race and ethnicity using
2017 2020 pre pandemic data.
1.3.4. TEXTBOOK SECTION 4: DISSEMINATION
AND CONCLUSIONS
The fourth section includes two final chapters. Chapter
11 covers the dissemination of research studies using
secondary data from national health surveys. It includes
examples on how create poster presentations, oral
presentations, abstracts, and full length original research
manuscripts. Chapter 12 provides a summary of what
has been presented in the textbook and outlines potential
recommendations for future editions.
1.4 SUMMARY
In summary, this textbook provides instruction on how
to conduct basic applied data analysis using secondary
data collected from national health surveys. The textbook
has been developed based on a previous course, PH 2999:
6 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Independent Study in Epidemiology. This individual
study course was developed by Dr. Kindratt while
receiving her PhD training at the University of Texas
Health (UTHealth) School of Public Health Dallas
Regional Campus. Dr. Kindratt developed for the
University of Texas at Arlingtonb^@^Ys KINE 4352 Big Data
for Epidemiology course. The content was originally
created to meet the requirements of a breadth 
concentration in large database analysis because there
was a lack of other courses which offered applied data
analysis skills using secondary national health surveys to
meet her professional goals and graduation requirements
at that time. Learning objectives of the previous course
were to:
1. Review existing research conducted using selected
national health surveys;
2. Review sample designs and survey methods used
when collecting national health survey data;
3. Develop SAS and STATA programs for merging
and analyzing selected national health surveys;
and
4. Create a teaching tool for each survey to
summarize data analysis methods for future
students.
The teaching tools developed for the course have been
used as the model for each of the chapters in this textbook
on specific national health surveys. The course included
analysis of MEPS, BRFSS, and NHANES surveys.
Examples of the teaching tools developed for PH 2999
are provided in the corresponding Open ICPSR data
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 7

repository. The examples and content have been updated
to reflect changes in survey designs, data collection
modalities, and the research interests of the primary
author. NHIS and HINTS case studies have been included
to make this open textbook more comprehensive of what
national surveys students will encounter in the workforce
and may be used for students volunteering or working in
UTAb^@^Ys HSR lab.
1.5 COVID 19 PANDEMIC CHANGES
The initial version of this textbook was written from June
through December 2020 during the early waves of the
COVID 19 pandemic. The methods described for the
national surveys in this textbook represent b^@^\prepandemicb^@^] methodologies. Many surveillance systems
and surveys had to modified due to safety concerns, stayat home orders, and data collection needs from 2020
onward.4 Some chapters includes a brief section that
discusses these changes for the respective survey.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 9

CHAPTER 2.

OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL HEALTH
SURVEYS

2.1 INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides a general overview of the United
States (US) national health surveys covered in this
textbook. Summaries are provided describing the
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), Health Information
National Trends Survey (HINTS), Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System (BRFSS), and National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). The
corresponding chapters for each survey (Chapters 6 10)
provide case studies using public use data from each
national health survey to answer research questions
pertaining to how predisposing and enabling factors of
individuals are associated with health behaviors and
preventive services use.
2.2 HISTORY OF NATIONAL HEALTH SURVEYS
National health surveys have been used in the US since
the 1920s. One of the first efforts to systematically collect
10 BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY

health information from the US population came from
the Committee on the Cost of Medical Care Studies
(CMCS) who collected data from 1928 to 1933.1 The
CMCS received funding from private organizations to
collect information on health care delivery and payments
from 8,758 families in 17 states and Washington, DC.
This monumental study documented the large disparity
in health care costs, with 40% of the costs being incurred
by only 10% of the families surveyed. A major limitation
of this national data collection effort was that it did not
include underrepresented minority groups, specifically
Black or African American families.1 From 1935 1936,
the Public Health Service implemented the National
Health Survey (NHS) to measure the incidence of illness
and use of medical services. This survey was the first to
use multistage area sampling across 21 states. The CMCS
and NHS provided national health data until the early
1950s. In 1953, the Health Information Foundation in
New York and National Opinion Research Center in
Chicago collaborated to develop the first survey using
a nation wide probability sample, which laid the
groundwork for national surveillance systems such as the
NHIS to be conducted annually. More details of the
history, design and context of national health surveys are
provided elsewhere.1
2.3 NATIONAL HEALTH INTERVIEW SURVEY
(NHIS)
Since 1957, the NHIS has been collected annually on a
national scale by the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS). The purpose of the NHIS is to monitor and
explore trends in the health status and health care
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 11

utilization among adults and children in the US.2
Secondary analyses of NHIS data use cross sectional
study designs. Self reported data are collected annually
using a computer assisted personal interviewing (CAPI)
system during in person interviews in households across
the US. The NHIS has one of the largest annual sample
sizes among national surveys. Data are collected from
roughly 35,000 households and 87,500 individuals each
year. From 2014 2018, the annual household response
rates slightly decreased from 73.8% in 2014 to 64.2% in
2018.2 Further details on the design, questionnaires,
public use data, and reports are available on the NHIS
website.
2.4 MEDICAL EXPENDITURE PANEL SURVEY
(MEPS)
Since 1996, the MEPS has been collected on a national
scale by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ). The purpose of the MEPS is to gather
information on health services used by adults and
children in the US, including cost, frequency, and
payment structures.3 The MEPS uses a survey panel
design that consists of five rounds of interviews over a
two year period. Therefore, the secondary analysis of
MEPS data can use both longitudinal or cross sectional
study designs. Households recruited for each panel are
selected based on a subsample of households who
participated in the previous yearb^@^Ys NHIS. Similar to the
NHIS, data are collected in person using a CAPI system.
Self administered paper questionnaires are also
completed by participants. Medical providers are
contacted by telephone to provide additional details on
12 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

medical visit summaries, diagnostic codes and billing.
The MEPS annual sample size is roughly 15,000
individuals. From 2014 2018, the annual combined (all
five rounds completed) response rates slightly decreased
from 48.5% in 2014 to 42.7% in 2018.3 Further details on
the design, questionnaires, public use data, and reports
are available on the MEPS website.
2.5 HEALTH INFORMATION NATIONAL TRENDS
SURVEY (HINTS)
Since 2003, the HINTS has been collected on a national
scale by the National Cancer Institute (NCI). The purpose
of the HINTS is to evaluate how patterns of health
information technology and health communication are
related to health related knowledge, attitudes and
behaviors among the non institutionalized US adult
civilian population.4 After the first 3 iterations (HINTS
1 collected in 2003, HINTS 2 collected in 2005, HINT 3
collected in 2008), each iteration was separated into four
cycles. HINTS 4 cycles were collected annually beginning
in 2011 (HINTS 4, Cycle 1 in 2011; HINTS 4, Cycle 2
in 2012; HINTS 4, Cycle 3 in 2013; HINTS 4, Cycle 4 in
2014). HINTS 5 cycles were collected annually beginning
in 2017 (HINTS 5, Cycle 1 in 2017; HINTS 5, Cycle 2
in 2018; HINTS 5, Cycle 3 in 2019; HINTS 5, Cycle 4
in 2020). Secondary analyses of HINTS data use crosssectional study designs. Self reported data have been
collected using random digit dialing, mailings and webbased data collection options. The HINTS sample size
is roughly 3,500 6,000 individuals for each iteration.
Response rates are calculated for each data collection
method. Total response rates are roughly 30% for each
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 13

iteration.4 Further details on the design, questionnaires,
public use data, and reports are available on the HINTS
website.
2.6 BEHAVIORAL RISK FACTOR SURVEILLANCE
SYSTEM (BRFSS)
Since 1984, the BRFSS has been collected on the state
level by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). The purpose of the BRFSS is collect data on health
behaviors, physical activity, diet, hypertension and
preventive safety measures (e.g. seat belt use) among US
adults.5 In 1988, the system was expanded to include
optional modules, including chronic disease, health care
access, and preventive services uptake. Some optional
modules include data collection among children. In 1993,
the BRFSS was expanded to become an annual national
surveillance system. Secondary analyses of BRFSS data
use cross sectional study designs. Self reported data are
collected annually using random digit dialing methods.
Data are collected using a computer assisted telephone
interview (CATI) system. Prior to 2008, data were only
collected from landline telephones. In 2008, the
methodology was revised to conduct interviews using cell
phones. The BRFSS is one of the largest health surveys
collected worldwide with over 400,000 responses
collected each year.6 Response rates are calculated for
landline, cell phone, and combined responses. In 2019,
the overall response rate was 49.4%. In 2018, the landline
response rate was 53.3% and the cell phone response rate
was 43.4%.5 Further details on the design, questionnaires,
public use data, and reports are available on the BRFSS
website.
14 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

2.7 NATIONAL HEALTH AND NUTRITION
EXAMINATION SURVEY (NHANES)
Since 1960, national data on the health and diet of
individuals in the US has been collected by the NCHS.
Starting in 1999, NHANES data have been collected from
adults and children on a consistent basis.7 Topics have
been expanded to include chronic diseases and other
health indicators over the years. Secondary analyses of
NHANES data use cross sectional study designs. The
NHANES differs from other national health surveys
because it collects self reported data using in person
household interviews while also collecting objective
measurements by physical examinations and laboratory
tests of participants at mobile examination centers.7,8
The inclusion of both objective and subjective
measurements allows for reliability comparisons. For
example, participants self report whether or not they
have ever been diagnosed with diabetes during the
household interviews and will have their glucose tested
for verification at the mobile examination center. The
sample size includes approximately 5,000 individuals
every year and data are compiled across two year data
collection periods (e.g. 2015 2016, 2017 2018). Response
rates are calculated for interviewed and examined
samples. During 2017 2018, the interviewed response
rate was 51.9% and the examination response rate was
48.8%.8 Further details on the design, questionnaires,
public use data, and reports are available on the
NHANES website.
2.8 RESTRICTED DATA
Although most data collected by national health surveys
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 15

are made available to the public in a deidentified format,
any data that may compromise the confidentiality of its
participants are restricted and require special procedures
and approvals to access. Among the national health
surveys discussed in this textbook, the NHANES and
NHIS have restricted data accessible by the NCHS and
Federal Statistical Research Data Centers. The NHANES
restricts data on geography (Census 2010 Block ID),
genetics (e.g. BRCA1 associated protein), and the exact
dates of participantsb^@^Y interviews and examinations.9 The
NHIS restricts data on geography.10 Among individuals
born in the US, data on participantsb^@^Y state of birth
(variable: USBRTHPL) and whether they live in an urban
or rural residence (variable: URB_RRL) are restricted.
Among foreign born participants, data on the year that
participants came to the US (variable: USYR) and their
country of birth (variable: COUNTRY) are restricted.10
The primary author of this textbook (Kindratt) and
colleagues have analyzed restricted NHIS data to
determine chronic disease prevalence,11 preventive
cancer screenings and vaccinations among men12 and
women,13 and smoking status14 among Arab American
immigrants. The NHIS collects data on country of birth
and categorizes each country into 10 worldwide
geographic regions (US, Mexico, Central America and
Caribbean Islands, South American, Europe, Russia,
Middle East, India subcontinent, Southeast Asia, and
Asia). The Middle East region includes individuals who
were born in 25 countries. However, some countries,
such as Iran, are located in the Middle East but not part of
the Arab League of Nations. Therefore, previous research
by Kindratt and others used responses to the country of
birth question to create a variable limited to individuals
16 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

born in 15 countries that were part of the Arab League
of Nations and geographically located in the Middle East
region to ensure the findings were representative of the
Arab ethnicity.11 14 Using restricted data from the NHIS
allowed the authors to disaggregate Arab American
immigrants from other ethnicities and exclude non Arab
countries (e.g. Iran) from the grouping.
2.9 LINKED DATA
National health survey data can also be linked to each
other and to other sources. The NHANES and NHIS can
be linked to data from the National Death Index to
determine mortality rates. For example, Borrell and
colleagues linked NHANES III data collected from
1988 1994 with 2015 mortality data to examine
associations between allostatic load and all cause 
cardiovascular disease specific mortality among US
adults.15 Because the MEPS collects data from the
previous yearb^@^Ys NHIS sample, ID numbers from each
survey can be linked to expand the variables for each
survey.16 Kindratt and colleagues have used linked NHIS
and MEPS data to answer several research questions on
Middle Eastern and North African cognitive health17 and
parentsb^@^Y perceptions of patient  and family centered care
practices among those whose children have
developmental and chronic health conditions.18
Additional studies using linked NHIS and MEPS data are
underway.
2.10 OTHER SURVEYS
There are several other national health surveys that
provide surveillance data for public health professionals
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 17

and researchers to utilize and examine trends. Inclusion
criteria, sample sizes, and health related content differs
across surveys. Although not a comprehensive list, a
selection of other common national health surveys are
listed below:
b^@" American Community Survey (ACS)
b^@" Health and Retirement Study (HRS)
b^@" National Death Index (NDI)
b^@" National Health and Aging Trends Survey
(NHATS)
b^@" National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to
Adult Health (Add Health)
b^@" National Study of Caregiving (NSOC)
b^@" National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG)
b^@" National Vital Statistics System (NVSS)
b^@" Youth Risk Factor Surveillance System (YRFSS)
2.11 SUMMARY
This chapter provided an overview of the national health
surveys covered in this textbook> It also covers brief
details of some expanded data analysis procedures and
exposure to other health surveys to broaden studentsb^@^Y
knowledge of other data sources. More specific details
on each survey are provided in Chapters 6 10 (Chapter
6 NHIS, Chapter 7 MEPS, Chapter 8 HINTS, Chapter 9
BRFSS, Chapter 10 NHANES).

18 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT


BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 21

CHAPTER 3.

LITERATURE REVIEW

3.1 OVERVIEW
This chapter includes a literature review of previous
studies that have used national health surveys to answer
public health and health services research questions. The
background literature provided lays the groundwork for
the case studies used in Chapters 6 10 in this textbook.
However, the literature reviews are not comprehensive.
The reader is encouraged to conduct their own literature
reviews in PubMed, Ovid MEDLINE, Google Scholar,
and other library sources to gain a deeper understanding
of the existing evidence for each topic.
3.2 NATIONAL HEALTH INTERVIEW SURVEY
(NHIS) CASE STUDY
The objective of the NHIS survey case study is to
determine associations between a combined measure of
race, ethnicity, and nativity status and seasonal influenza
vaccine uptake among foreign born Arab Americans
compared to other racial ethnic groups. Data from the

22 BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY

2018 NHIS person and sample adult files will be used to
fulfil this objective.
3.2.1 WHY EXAMINE DIFFERENCES IN
INFLUENZA VACCINE UPTAKE AMONG
FOREIGN BORN ARAB AMERICANS COMPARED
TO OTHER US  GROUPS?
During the 2018 2019 season, it was estimated that there
were 38,000,000 cases of symptomatic illness, 18,000,000
medical visits, and 22,000 deaths in the US.1 Seasonal
influenza vaccination is recommended among all
individuals ages 6 months and older to prevent morbidity
and mortality from influenza and other health
conditions.2 Despite established benefits, disparities exist
in vaccination coverage by race, ethnicity, and nativity
status. Using 2010 2016 NHIS data, Lu and colleagues
found that Hispanic and non Hispanic Black adults were
less likely to receive annual influenza vaccines compared
to non Hispanic Whites.3 Using 2012 data, Lu and
colleagues found foreign born adults were less likely to
receive an influenza vaccination than their US born
counterparts.4 Results were similar among other studies.5
Research on influenza vaccination coverage among Arab
Americans is limited despite evidence showing that
morbidity and mortality estimates for several health
conditions are higher than other groups. For example,
Dallo and colleagues evaluated administrative hospital
data and found that Arab American women were more
likely to have influenza or pneumonia than non Hispanic
White women in Michigan.6 Furthermore, other research
has demonstrated that Arab American males have higher
mortality rates from influenza or pneumonia than other
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 23

non Hispanic White males.7 In 2015, Dallo and Kindratt
used NHIS data to determine the prevalence of not
receiving influenza vaccinations among Arab American
men and women compared to US  and foreign born nonHispanic White adults from Europe using NHIS person
level and sample adult data.8,9 A foreign born Arab
American ethnic group was created using restricted
country of birth data collected from the NHIS. Results
indicated that foreign born Arab American men had 62%
lower odds (OR=0.38; 95% CI=0.21 0.67) and foreignborn Arab American women had 66% lower odds
(OR=0.34; 95% CI=0.21 0.58) of receiving an influenza
vaccine compared to their US born non Hispanic White
counterparts.8,9 The NHIS case study will extend this
previous research by using 2018 public use person and
sample adult data.
3.3 MEDICAL EXPENDITURE PANEL SURVEY
(MEPS) CASE STUDY
The objective of the MEPS case study is to determine
associations between adultsb^@^Y perceptions of patientprovider communication quality and seasonal influenza
vaccination uptake. Data from the 2015 and 2016 MEPS
household level in person and self administered
questionnaire data will be used to fulfil this objective.
3.3.1 WHY DETERMINE HOW ADULTSb^@^Y
PERCEPTIONS OF PATIENT PROVIDER
COMMUNICATION QUALITY ARE ASSOCIATED
WITH INFLUENZA VACCINATION?
Efforts are needed to address barriers to influenza
vaccination uptake among underrepresented racial,
24 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

ethnic, and immigrant minority groups. Previous
research suggests that effective communication between
health care providers and patients during in person and
between visits may contribute to more adults receiving
recommended preventive services, including cancer
screenings and influenza vaccinations.10 13 Kindratt and
colleagues previous research using 2011 2015 MEPS
data examined associations between adultsb^@^Y perceptions
of specific qualities of patient provider communication
and their likelihood of receiving cancer screenings by
racial and ethnic subgroups.10 Results demonstrated that
Hispanic and non Hispanic Black adults who reported
their health care providers gave them specific
instructions had higher odds of receiving breast and
colorectal cancer screenings. Non Hispanic Asian
women who reported their health care providers asked
them to describe how they were going to follow the
instructions given to them had higher odds of receiving
cervical cancer screenings.10 Research examining the role
of patient provider communication on influenza vaccine
uptake using nationally representative samples is limited.
Villani and Mortensen (2013) examined the influence of
patient provider communication qualities on preventive
services uptake, including recommended cancer
screenings and vaccinations, using 2009 MEPS data.14
They did not find a statistically significant association
between adultsb^@^Y (ages 50+ years) perceptions of patientprovider communication and influenza vaccine uptake.
However, to my knowledge, no other studies have
examined the role of patient provider communication
during face to face visits on influenza vaccine uptake
using nationally representative MEPS data. The MEPS
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 25

case study will extend this previous research by using
2015 2016 household data.
3.4 HEALTH INFORMATION NATIONAL TRENDS
SURVEY (HINTS) CASE STUDY
The objective of the HINTS case study is to explore
associations between e mail communication and breast
cancer screening uptake. Data from the HINTS 5, Cycle 3
data collected in 2019 will be used to fulfil this objective.
3.4.1 WHY DETERMINE HOW THE USE OF
E MAIL COMMUNICATION IS ASSOCIATED
WITH BREAST CANCER SCREENING UPTAKE?
Advances in health information technology and the use
of the internet as a mode of communication have allowed
for greater interaction between health care providers and
their patients between visits. In addition to traditional
telephone communications, patients can communicate
with their health care providers by e mail, text messaging,
patient portals, and mobile applications. Previous studies
have examined patientsb^@^Y perceptions of the benefits of
electronic patient provider communication, specifically
using e mail communication. Patients identified some
benefits to using e mail communication, including
convenient access at any time, increased level of comfort
asking questions, and the ability to save and keep track
of conversations.16 Studies have shown that using e mail
patient provider communication may lead to improved
health outcomes. Research examining associations
between e mail patient provider communication and
adultsb^@^Y use of preventive services are limited. Using
2011 2015 NHIS data, Kindratt and colleagues
26 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

demonstrated that adults who used e mail to
communicate with their health care providers had 1.51
times greater odds (95% CI=1.44 1.59) of receiving a
seasonal influenza vaccine compared to those who do
not use e mail to communicate with their health care
providers.12 Using HINTS 4, Cycles 1 4 data, Kindratt
and colleagues also looked at associations between e mail
patient provider communication and cancer screenings
using HINTS data. Results demonstrated that there was
not a significant association between e mail patientprovider communication and breast, cervical or
colorectal cancer screenings.11 No other studies have
evaluated the influence of e mail patient provider
communication practices on cancer screenings using
national representative HINTS data. The HINTS case
study will extend this previous research by using HINTS 5,
Cycle 3 data.
3.5 BEHAVIOR RISK FACTOR SURVEILLANCE
SYSTEM (BRFSS) CASE STUDY
The objective of the BRFSS case study is to explore
whether differences in Alzheimerb^@^Ys disease and related
dementia (ADRD) caregiving experiences among urban
and rural adults in Texas are moderated by race and
ethnicity. The differences obtained among urban and
rural adults will be evaluated as a whole, and stratified by
racial and ethnic groups. Data from the 2019 BRFSS will
be used to fulfil this objective.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 27

3.5.1 WHY EXPLORE HOW DIFFERENCES IN
ADRD CAREGIVING EXPERIENCES AMONG
URBAN AND RURAL ADULTS IN TEXAS ARE
MODERATED BY RACE AND ETHNICITY?
In 2020, the National Alliance for Caregiving and
American Association of Retired Persons estimated that
21% of adults in the US are informal caregivers, which
has increased by 9.5 million since 2015.17 Over 11 million
unpaid individuals, family or friends, are caregivers for
persons living with ADRD.17 While most older adults
with ADRD are currently non Hispanic White, the racial
and ethnic diversity of older adults living with ADRD is
increasing.18
Previous studies on ADRD caregiving experiences
across geographic contexts highlight unmet resource
needs and support the lack of dementia specific19 and
respite services20 in non metro or rural areas. Urban 
rural comparisons of ADRD caregiving experiences have
been limited to descriptive analyses due to research
studies only being conducted with small nonrepresentative samples. Few studies have examined
differences in caregiving experiences among racial and
ethnic caregivers living in urban and rural areas.21
A recent study was conducted using data from the
National Study of Caregiving (NSOC), which includes a
sample of caregivers linked to the National Health and
Aging Trends Survey (NHATS).22 The aims of the study
were to determine whether: 1) caregiver experiences and
health differed across urban and rural areas and 2) the
links between caregiving experiences and health were
moderated by caregiver race ethnicity. Results indicated
non metro ADRD caregivers were less racially ethnically
28 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

diverse (82.7% White), and more were spouses partners
(20.2%).22 Among racial ethnic minority ADRD
caregivers, non metro context was associated with
having more chronic conditions, providing less care, and
not co residing with care recipients. Amid White ADRD
caregivers, non metro context was associated with not
reporting caregiving was more than they could handle
and finding financial assistance for caregiving. Nonmetro minority ADRD caregivers had 3.09 times higher
odds (95% CI=1.02 9.36) of reporting anxiety in
comparison to metro minority ADRD caregivers.22 While
this study lays the groundwork for national research on
ADRD caregiving by geographic context, large
differences may exist by state. The BRFSS case study will
extend this previous research by using BRFSS data from
Texas.
3.6 NATIONAL HEALTH AND NUTRITION
EXAMINATION SURVEY (NHANES) CASE STUDY
The NHANES case study will focus on movement
behaviors among US adults. The objective of the
NHANES case study is to evaluate adherence to 24 hour
movement guidelines (sleep, sedentary behavior, and
physical activity) among US adults and determine
differences by race, ethnicity, and nativity status.
Sedentary behavior will be used as the outcome of
interest. Specifically, data from the 2017 2020 in person
interviews and examination data will be used to fulfil this
objective.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 29

3.6.1. WHY EVALUATE 24 HOUR MOVEMENT
GUIDELINE ADHERENCE AMONG RACIAL AND
ETHNIC GROUPS IN THE US?
The recently published 24 hour movement guidelines
include recommendations for sedentary behavior,
physical activity, and sleep among adults ages 18 64 years
and 65 years and older.23 The guidelines integrate
recommendations for sleep, physical activity, and
sedentary behavior with the acknowledgement that
combination of these behaviors throughout the day is
associated with health outcomes.23 There are slight
differences between recommendations for younger and
older adults. For example, it is recommended that adults
ages 18 64 years get 7 to 9 hours of good quality sleep on
a regular basis, with consistent bed and wake up times.
It is recommended that adults perform a variety of
intensities and types of physical activity, including 1)
moderate to vigorous aerobic physical activities that
accumulate up to 150 minutes per week, 2) muscle
strengthening activities using major muscle groups at
least twice a week, and 30 several hours of light physical
activities, including standing. Finally, it is recommended
that adults limit sedentary behavior to 8 hours or less
(~480 minutes), including no more than 3 hours of
recreational screen time and breaking up long periods of
sitting as often as possible.24 Little is known about how
adherence to these guidelines differs among US adults,
particularly among different racial and ethnic groups. The
NHANES case study will explore racial and ethnic
differences in sedentary behavior among US  and foreignborn Hispanics, non Hispanic Whites, non Hispanic

30 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Blacks, and non Hispanic Asians using 2017 2020 prepandemic data.
3.7 SUMMARY
In summary, this chapter provided a brief background
to support the case studies used in Chapters 6 10. The
topics of the case studies are broad and encompass the
wide range of research being conducted using national
health surveys by the primary author of this textbook.
The reader is encouraged to conduct their own literature
reviews using electronic databases to gain a deeper
understanding of the content areas for each case study.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 35

CHAPTER 4.

BASIC DATA ANALYSIS

4.1. OVERVIEW
This chapter covers the steps for preparing secondary
data for statistical analysis and how to run common
statistical tests. The reader will be introduced to some
basic data analysis procedures using SAS 9.4. It is
important to follow the steps for preparing secondary
data for statistical analysis to ensure accuracy,
particularly when using numerous years or combining
multiple data files within each year. The examples in this
chapter will use data from the 2018 National Health
Interview Survey (NHIS) Sample Adult file. The examples
will demonstrate ways to answer the following two
research questions among adults ages 18 and older in the
United States (US):
b^@" Research Question 4.1: What are the associations
between region (geographic location where
participant lives) and health information
technology (HIT) usage?
b^@" Research Question 4.2: What is the association
36 BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY

between sex and HIT usage?
The NHIS includes five questions to measure individualsb^@^Y
use of different aspects of HIT usage during the past 12
months, including whether or not adults use computers
to
fill
prescriptions,
schedule
appointments,
communicate with others through chat groups, look up
health information online, and communicate with health
care providers by e mail.1 The primary author of this
textbook (Kindratt) and colleagues have used NHIS data
to explore how HIT usage influences vaccination and
cancer screening uptake.2,3 The examples in this chapter
will focus on differences by sociodemographic factors,
such as place of residence and sex. SAS 9.4 procedures
will be used to demonstrate how to meet the following
research objectives using common statistical tests.
b^@" Objective 4.1: To determine the association
between region and looking up health
information on the internet
b^@" Objective 4.2: To determine the association
between region and filling prescriptions on the
internet
b^@" Objective 4.3: To determine the association
between region and scheduling appointments on
the internet
b^@" Objective 4.4: To determine the association
between region and communicating with health
care provider by e mail
b^@" Objective 4.5: To determine the association
between sex and the number of HIT uses (scale
from 0 to 4)
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 37

b^@" Objective 4.6: To determine the associations
between sex and each HIT use (looking up health
information online, filling prescriptions,
scheduling appointments, and communicating
with a health care provider by e mail) before and
after controlling for other contributing factors
It is important to note that the examples provided in this
chapter are not weighted and do not include procedures
for adjusting the results based on the complex survey
design. Therefore, estimates you obtain as the results are
not representative of the true findings. The complex
sample design features that should be used when
analyzing national health data will be described in
Chapter 5.
4.2 FOUR STEP PROCESS FOR SECONDARY
DATA ANALYSIS
When preparing secondary data for statistical analysis,
it is important to follow these steps to ensure accuracy
and completeness of your data. This 4 step process was
developed based on recommendations from Elliot and
colleagues for preparing and managing primary data in
Microsoft Excel and Database Creation and Coding
sessions by Kindratt for training medical and physician
assistant students.4 6 The four steps include: 1) data
selection; 2) data collection; 3) data verification; and 4)
data storage.
4.2.1 DATA SELECTION
The first step is data selection, which is the process of
determining the appropriate data type and source, as well
38 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

as suitable instruments to collect data. Once a research
question has been solidified, the next step in secondary
data analysis is to determine the appropriate data source.
For this example, the research question focuses on
differences in where adults live in the US and their HIT
use. Since the NHIS is one of the largest national surveys
that collects this information and provides publicly
available data, it is a good selection to answer this
research question.
4.2.2 DATA COLLECTION
The second step is data collection, which is the process
of gathering and measuring information on variables of
interest in an established and systematic fashion that
enables one to answer stated research questions and test
hypotheses. For secondary data analysis, data collection
procedures include downloading the necessary data file
and supporting documentation from websites and
collecting data from only the variables needed to answer
the research question and objectives. The 2018 NHIS
Sample Adult file and Sample SAS statements can be
downloaded from the NHIS data release website.
To collect the appropriate variables for this analysis,
complete the following:
b^@" Go to your b^@^\C:\b^@^] drive and create a folder named
b^@^\NHISb^@^]
b^@" In the b^@^\NHISb^@^] folder, create a folder named b^@^\18b^@^]
b^@" Download the 2018 Sample Adult ASCII data file
(.dat) from the 2018 NHIS data release website
b^@" Unzip the file and save it in the folder b^@^\C:\NHIS\
18b^@^]
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 39

b^@" Download b^@^\File 4.1 Sample SAS Program to
Create NHIS 2018 Sample Adult Fileb^@^] from the
Open ICPSR data repository
b^@" Open the file and select b^@^\Runb^@^] from the top menu
bar
Your analytic dataset should include the following 9
variables:
1. SRVY_YR
2. FPX
3. AGE_P
4. SEX
5. REGION
6. HIT1A
7. HIT2A
8. HIT3A
9. HIT4A
To verify the variables in the analytic dataset, run the
PROC CONTENTS statement in Box 4.1.
Box 4.1. SAS procedure (PROC CONTENTS) for verifying the
variables included in the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult example
analytic dataset

If you are unable to create the permanent analytic
dataset using the preceding steps, click on b^@^\File 4.2
40 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Permanent SAS Analytic Databaseb^@^] to download and save
the database in the folder b^@^\C:\NHIS\18.b^@^]
4.2.3 DATA VERIFICATION
The third step is data verification, which involves
verifying that the results from the analytic dataset you
created match those provided by the original dataset.
Most national health surveys, including the NHIS,
provide at least unweighted frequency counts for you to
match your findings with those published on the website.
Other national health surveys, such as the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey, provide more detailed
information like weighted frequencies and percentages.
The frequency verification should be completed prior to
making any changes to the variables you collected for
your analysis. Your results will not match if you verify
the frequencies after applying any limitations to the data.
For example, if your sample only includes adults ages 45
and older, I recommend that you verify the results for
adults ages 18 and older prior to removing individuals
ages 18 44 years to ensure the accuracy of the analytic
dataset.
In this example, you can view the unweighted
frequencies for variables you collected by going to the
2018 NHIS data release website and clicking on b^@^\Variable
frequenciesb^@^] in the b^@^\Sample Adult Fileb^@^] section. You
should be able to search for each variable by clicking
b^@^\Ctrlb^@^] and b^@^\Fb^@^] and typing the name of the variable into
the search box. You will need to run frequencies for each
variable of interest in SAS to verify results. PROC FREQ
is the procedure for displaying frequencies in SAS. You
can enter the SAS syntax from Box 4.2 to determine the
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 41

frequencies for all variables in the analytic dataset.
Variable FPX is excluded because it represents the ID
number of the participant.
Box 4.2. SAS procedure (PROC FREQ) for verifying frequencies
in the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult example analytic dataset

The unweighted frequencies for the variables collected
in this example are presented in Table 4.1. The variable
for age (AGE_P) is excluded from the table due to
multiple response options (age 18 85 years and older).

42 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Table 4.1. Frequencies for data collected in the 2018 NHIS
Sample Adult example analytic dataset
Variable Description (VARIABLE NAME)

Frequency

Survey Year (SRVY_YR)
2018

25,417

Sex (SEX)
1=Male

11,550

2=Female

13,867

Region (REGION)
1=Northeast

4,143

2=Midwest

5,949

3=South

9,312

4=West

6,013

Looked up health information on internet, past 12 months (HIT1A)
1=Yes

13,677

2=No

11,431

7=Refused

11

8=Not ascertained

273

9=Donb^@^Yt know

25

Filled a prescription on internet, past 12 months (HIT2A)
1=Yes

2,892

2=No

22,240

7=Refused

6

8=Not ascertained

274

9=Donb^@^Yt know

5

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 43

Table 4.1 (continued). Frequencies for data collected in the 2018
NHIS Sample Adult example analytic dataset
Variable Description (VARIABLE NAME)

Frequency

Scheduled medical appointment on internet, past 12 months (HIT3A)
1=Yes

3,962

2=No

21,163

7=Refused

7

8=Not ascertained

274

9=Donb^@^Yt know

11

Communicated with health care provider by email, past 12 months
(HIT4A)
1=Yes

4,176

2=No

20,948

7=Refused

7

8=Not ascertained

274

9=Donb^@^Yt know

12

For continuous or discrete variables with multiple
responses (variable: AGE_P), summary statistics can be
used to verify the measure of central tendency (mean),
measure of dispersion (spread), range, and total number
of responses. PROC MEANS is the procedure used for
displaying the mean and standard deviation. You can
enter the SAS syntax from Box 4.3 to determine the mean
and standard deviation for AGE_P in the example
analytic dataset.

44 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 4.3. SAS procedure (PROC MEANS) for verifying
continuous discrete variable distributions in the 2018 NHIS
Sample Adult example analytic dataset

4.2.4 DATA STORAGE
The fourth step is data storage. When using secondary
data from publicly available sources, it is important to
save the original datasets that you downloaded from the
website. This helps ensure that you always have your data
in case the website address changes or there is a change
in policy that prohibits you from accessing the data at
no cost. For restricted data, you must follow the rules
for data storage set forth by the agency that owns the
restricted data. You may not be able to keep the data
over a certain period of time and you may be asked to
destroy any outputs with results after the publication of
your research.
Each time you make changes to your analytic dataset in
SAS, you can save the data using the following two ways:
1. b^@^\workb^@^] file
2. b^@^\permanentb^@^] file
The work file is temporary and will only be saved for the
current analysis. A limitation of creating a work file is
that you will have to re run the code again each time you
use the data if you made any changes to the file (i.e. create
recoded variables). However, some benefits to creating
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 45

a work file are that it will not take up as much space
on your computer and the procedures often run faster.
Another benefit to saving a permanent data file is that the
cleaned, recoded and organized analytic dataset is saved
and available for running analyses again after your study
is completed. Box 4.4 provides SAS coding for creating
a new work file from a permanent data file and a
permanent data file from a work file. The permanent file
includes a libname in front of the temporary file name
(e.g. NHIS.ch4_file1 (permanent) vs. ch4_file (work)).
Box 4.4. SAS programming statements to create work and
permanent analytic datasets

4.3 COMMON STATISTICAL TESTS
Prior to choosing the type of statistical test you must
know the type of data collected and the variables you
will use to answer your research questions and fulfil your
objectives. You must know whether the data are
continuous or categorical and specify the independent,
dependent, and other contributing variables that will be
included in the analysis.
4.3.1 TYPES OF DATA
Secondary data sources can include continuous and
46 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

categorical variables. Continuous variables are numeric
responses and can be ratio (with a meaningful zero, such
as height) or interval (without a meaningful zero, such
as temperature). Continuous responses may be subjective
(e.g. self reported), objective (e.g. clinically measured) or
both measurements. Categorical variables include
nominal and ordinal responses. Nominal responses
include categories that do not have a more or less than
relationship. A nominal variable for the example used
in this chapter is b^@^\REGION.b^@^] The US region where an
individual resides includes the following values:
1=Northeast; 2=Midwest; 3=South; or 4=West. An
individual who lives in the West region is not any better
than someone who lives in the South region. Binary, also
referred to as dichotomous, responses represent variables
with only two options. A binary variable for the example
used in this chapter is b^@^\SEX.b^@^] The sex of each individual
is represented as 1=male and 2=female. There is no more
or less than relationship between males and females. Each
measure of HIT use can also be represented as a binary
variable once the responses for 7=Refused, 8=Not
Ascertained, and 9=Donb^@^Yt Know are removed made
missing. Each recoded variable for HIT use with 1=Yes
and 0=No responses will then be binary dichotomous.
Ordinal or ranked variables represent data that have a
more or less than relationship. Variables must include at
least three categories. An ordinal variable for the example
in this chapter can be created by adding up all of the HIT
uses of participants to determine the total number of HIT
uses (0=Does not use any health information technology
to 4=Use the internet to look up information, fill
prescriptions, schedule appointments, and communicate
with a health care provider by email). Other common
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 47

examples of ordinal variables are Likert scales of
agreement (1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree) and
smoking status (0=never, 1=former, 2=current). An
overview of the types of data used for research using
national health surveys is provided in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Flowchart of types of data

The type of variable that you need to answer your
research question may be different than what is available
using the publicly available data files. It is common to
recode variables to limit the responses based on how you
want the data to be used for answering your research
questions. IF THEN programming statements can be
used for recoding prior to statistical analysis. SAS syntax
used to create new binary variables and an ordinal HIT
usage variable is provided in Box 4.5.

48 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 4.5. SAS programming statements (IF THEN) for recoding
secondary data

In Box 4.5, each HIT use variable has been recoded
to a binary variable with b^@^\_NEWb^@^] added to the end of
the original variable name (e.g. HIT4A_NEW for yes no
responses to communicating with a health care provider
by e mail in the past 12 months). A new ordinal variable
named HIT_SCALE was created to represent the total
number of HIT uses.
4.3.2 TYPES OF VARIABLES
Once the type of data is determined, the independent,
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 49

dependent and other contributing variables need to be
identified. The independent variable in a statistical model
is the variable used determine the influence or impact on
the outcome.7 The independent variable is also known as
the b^@^\predictorb^@^] or b^@^\exposureb^@^] variable. In the 2018 NHIS
Sample Adult example, the independent variable for
research question 4.1 is region and the independent
variable for research question 4.2 is sex. The dependent
variable in a statistical model is the variable used as the
outcome, for which differences or variations in the
dependent variable are being studied.7 The dependent
variable is also known as the b^@^\outcomeb^@^] variable. In the
2018 NHIS Sample Adult example, the dependent
variables are each individual HIT usage (looking up
health information on the internet, filling prescriptions,
scheduling appointments, and communicating with a
health care provider by e mail) and the HIT usage scale
(0 4). Other contributing factors, such as confounders
and covariates, must also be determined. Confounders
are defined as any variables that are causally associated
with the dependent variable, not causally or causally
associated with the independent variable, but are not
intermediate variables in the casual pathway between the
independent and dependent variables.8 Covariates are
defined as variables that are potentially related to the
dependent variable.9 This term is often used to represent
any contributing or explanatory factor that may bias the
results. Covariates can be adjusted for during statistical
analysis to reduce bias. In the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult
example, a covariate is age. Other covariates often
controlled for in statistical analysis include risk factors,
social determinants of health, and health behaviors.
50 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Covariates may differ based on the independent and
dependent variables of interest in your study.
4.3.3 SAS PROCEDURES FOR COMMON
STATISTICAL TESTS
Common statistical tests used for categorical data
analysis with national health surveys include chi square,
Wilcoxon rank sum (also known as Mann Whitney U)
tests, and logistic regression tests.
4.3.3.a Chi Square

The Pearson chi square test is used to compare
categorical independent variables and categorical
dependent variables that are binary dichotomous or
nominal.7 Results pertaining to the first four research
objectives mentioned in section 4.1 can be calculated by
using chi square tests. As a reminder, the first four
research objectives are:
b^@" Objective 4.1: To determine the association
between region (independent variable) and
looking up health information on the internet
(dependent variable)
b^@" Objective 4.2: To determine the association
between region (independent variable) and filling
prescriptions on the internet (dependent variable)
b^@" Objective 4.3: To determine the association
between region (independent variable) and
scheduling appointments on the internet
(dependent variable)
b^@" Objective 4.4: To determine the association
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 51

between region (independent variable) and
communicating with a health care provider by email (dependent variable)
The independent (predictor or exposure) and dependent
(outcome) variables are identified in each objective.
PROC FREQ is the procedure used to display the
crosstabulation of variables and calculation of the chi
square test result. To calculate the chi square test result,
you must list a b^@^\*b^@^] between the independent and
dependent variable and add b^@^\ CHISQb^@^] at the end of the
statement that begins with b^@^\tables.b^@^] You can calculate the
chi square test for each dependent variable separately or
you can run then together.
You can enter the SAS syntax from Box 4.6 to
determine the chi square test results.
Box 4.6. SAS procedure (PROC FREQ with  CHISQ) for running
chi square test using the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult example
analytic dataset

4.3.3.b Wilcoxon Rank Sum Mann Whitney U Test

The Wilcoxon Rank Sum (also known as the MannWhitney U) test is used to compare differences in the
52 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

medians of ordinal dependent variables among binary 
dichotomous independent variables.7 The median is the
center of observations when listed in rank order. The
independent variable must only have two categories. For
two or more categories, the Kruskal Wallis (H) test
should be used instead.7 In SAS 9.4, the coding statements
for both tests are the same. The Wilcoxon Rank Sum test
can be used to obtain results for research objective 4.5 in
the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult example. As a reminder:
b^@" Objective 4.5: To determine association between
sex (independent variable) and the number of HIT
usages (dependent variable)
The independent (predictor or exposure) and dependent
(outcome) variables are identified in the objective. PROC
NPAR1WAY is the procedure used to calculate the
Wilcoxon Rank Sum test result. The SAS procedure for
PROC NPAR1WAY is similar to PROC MEANS. Instead
of b^@^\tablesb^@^] in the second line, you will use the statement
b^@^\VARb^@^] before the dependent variable (HIT_SCALE). The
independent variable (SEX) is listed next to a b^@^\CLASSb^@^]
statement on the next line. You can enter the SAS syntax
from Box 4.7 to determine the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test
result.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 53

Box 4.7. SAS procedure (PROC NPAR1WAY) for the Wilcoxon
Rank Sum test in the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult example analytic
dataset

4.3.3.c Logistic Regression

Regression modeling is used to explore relations between
independent (predictor) variables and dependent
(outcome) variables before and after adjusting for other
contributing factors that may bias the results. Logistic
regression models are used when the dependent
(outcome) variable is binary dichotomous.7 Regression
models that do not adjust for other contributing factors
are called b^@^\crudeb^@^] or b^@^\unadjustedb^@^] models. Regression
models that do adjust for other contributing factors are
called b^@^\multivariableb^@^] or b^@^\adjustedb^@^] models. Crude and
multivariable logistic regression models can be used to
obtain results for research objective 4.6 in the 2018 NHIS
Sample Adult example. As a reminder:
b^@" Objective 4.6: To determine the associations
between sex (independent variable) and each HIT
usage b^@^T looking up health information online,
filling prescriptions, scheduling appointments,
and communicating with a health care provider
by e mail b^@^T (dependent variables) before and after
controlling for other contributing factors

54 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

The independent (predictor or exposure) and dependent
(outcome) variables are identified in the objective. The
contributing factors that will be controlled for to reduce
bias are region and age. PROC LOGISTIC is the
procedure used to calculate the results. Enter the SAS
syntax from Box 4.8 and Box 4.9 to determine the crude
and multivariable results, respectively. The CLASS
statement identifies the reference or comparison group
for the categorical independent variable and other
covariates. For the variable SEX, comparisons are made
between females and males. In the analytic dataset, males
are represented by b^@^\1b^@^] and females are represented by
b^@^\2.b^@^] Therefore, the reference category is b^@^\1b^@^] so that our
results will represent the odds of females using HIT in
comparison to males. The MODEL statement is set up as
b^@^\dependent variable = independent variable (+ covariates
for multivariable analysis).b^@^] The DESCENDING
statement after the dependent variable identifies the
higher value as the outcome of interest. For each HIT
use, b^@^\1=yesb^@^] should be the outcome that is modeled.
Therefore, the results will indicate the odds of using HIT
instead of the odds of not using HIT.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 55

Box 4.8. SAS procedure (PROC LOGISTIC) for crude logistic
regression results in the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult example

56 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 4.9. SAS Procedure (PROC LOGISTIC) for multivariable
logistic regression results in the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult
example

4.4. SUMMARY
This chapter provided an overview of the steps for
preparing secondary data for statistical analysis and how
to run common statistical tests in SAS 9.4 using primarily
categorical data. The examples used in this chapter are
from the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult public use data files.
The examples in this chapter focused on determining
associations between demographic factors (region, sex)
and HIT usage (looking up health information online,
filling prescriptions, scheduling appointments, and
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 57

communicating with health care providers by e mail)
among US adults. SAS 9.4 analysis procedures were
demonstrated for running descriptive statistics, recoding
variables, and conducting comparative statistical analyses
with chi square tests, Wilcoxon Rank Sum tests, and
logistic regression models. As previously mentioned, the
examples provided in this chapter are not weighted and
do not include procedures for adjusting the results based
on the complex survey design. The use of complex sample
design features for national health data will be described
in Chapter 5.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 59

CHAPTER 5.

COMPLEX SURVEY DESIGN FEATURES

5.1 OVERVIEW
In Chapter 4, you learned the steps for preparing
secondary data for statistical analysis and how to run
common statistical tests using examples from the 2018
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) Sample Adult
public use data. SAS 9.4 programming statements were
provided to run summary statistics (frequencies, means
and standard deviations), chi square tests, Wilcoxon Rank
Sum Mann Whitney U tests, and crude and multivariable
logistic regression models. In this chapter, you will learn
how to run statistical tests using special procedures
designed to account for the complex sample designs used
for national health surveys. In order to produce
representative estimates using national health surveys,
variables for the cluster, stratum, and weighting variables
must be included using SAS SURVEY procedures. The
examples in this chapter will use 2018 NHIS Sample
Adult data to answer the following research questions.
b^@" Research Question 5.1: What are associations
between region and health information
60 BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY

technology (HIT) usage among adults ages 18 and
older in the United States (US)?
b^@" Research Question 5.2: What are associations
between sex and HIT usage among adults ages 18
and older in the US?
The research objectives are:
b^@" Objective 5.1: To determine the association
between region and looking up health
information on the internet
b^@" Objective 5.2: To determine the association
between region and filling prescriptions on the
internet
b^@" Objective 5.3: To determine the association
between region and scheduling appointments on
the internet
b^@" Objective 5.4: To determine the association
between region and communicating with health
care provider by e mail
b^@" Objective 5.5: To determine the associations
between sex and each HIT usage (looking up
health information online, filling prescriptions,
scheduling appointments, and communicating
with a health care provider by e mail) before and
after controlling for other contributing factors
SAS 9.4 SURVEY procedures will be used to demonstrate
how to meet the research objectives. It is important to
note that Objective 4.5 from Chapter 4 has been removed
from this chapter because there are no corresponding
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 61

survey procedures for the Wilcoxon Rank Sum Mann
Whitney U test at the time of this writing.
5.2 COMPLEX SURVEY DESIGN FEATURES
The secondary analysis of national health surveys
involves using advanced survey based statistical
procedures to account for the sophisticated sampling
designs. Stratification, clustering, and weighting
techniques must be used with Taylor Series Linearization
methods, which are outlined in the data analytic
recommendations for each survey. Table 5.1 provides
some examples of the complex design variables for the
national health surveys included in this textbook.

62 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

TABLE 5.1. SELECTED CLUSTERING,
STRATIFICATION, AND WEIGHTING VARIABLES
USED FOR ANALYZING COMPLEX NATIONAL
HEALTH SURVEYS
Survey

Stratification

Clustering

Weighting

National Health
Interview
Survey (NHIS)

PSTRAT

PPSU

WTFA_SA

Medical
Expenditure
Panel Survey
(MEPS)

VARSTR

VARPSU

PERWTF18F

Health
Information
National Trends
Survey (HINTS)

VAR_STRATUM

VAR_CLUSTER

TG_all_FINWT0

Behavior Risk
Factor
Surveillance
Survey (BRFSS)

_STSTR

_PSU

_LLCP_WGT

National Health
and Nutrition
Examination
Survey
(NHANES)

SDMVSTRA

SDMVPSU

WTINT2YR

5.2.1 STRATIFICATION
National health surveys use stratification methods to
draw a sample from the larger sampling frame of the
population. The large sampling frame is divided into
mutually exclusive strata and the sample is then selected
from each stratum.1 Lewis (2017) states the following
three reasons for using stratification in complex national
health surveys: 1) to improve representation of smaller
subgroups in the population; 2) to allow for multiple
modes of data collection; and 3) to improve precision
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 63

of statistical estimates.1 First, stratification allows for
oversampling of subgroups by race ethnicity and among
states with smaller populations. For example, the NHIS
oversampled underrepresented minority populations
(non Hispanic Black, Hispanic, and non Hispanic Asian)
from 2006 2015.2 In 2016, the NHIS sample design was
modified to collect larger samples in smaller states.
Sample sizes were increased in the 10 least populous
states and Washington D.C.2 Second, stratification allows
for the use of random digit dialing, in person, direct
mailing, and online data collection methods to be
conducted in a systematic manner. The Health
Information National Trends Survey (HINTS) has used
several data collection methods, including random digit
dialing, direct mailing, and the recently adopted webbased data collection procedures.3 Finally, the results will
be more precise with homogeneous strata collected in
relation to the outcome variable.1
5.2.2 CLUSTERING
National health surveys use clustering methods to gain
large samples while reducing data collection costs.
Clusters are identified in national health survey
documentation as primary, secondary, and tertiary
sampling units.1 Clustering allows for national health
surveys to collect data on multiple individuals from each
household, multiple patients attending one clinic, or
multiple students from one school.1 At the state level,
primary sampling unit clusters are created to select
samples from large metropolitan statistical areas and
counties. Within each cluster, census housing blocks are
selected as secondary sampling units. Within each census
64 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

block, households are selected as tertiary sampling units.
For the NHIS, self reported interview data are collected
from all individuals in each household then a designated
sample adult and sample child are selected from
households to answer additional questions on health
conditions and behaviors.4 Complex national health
survey analysis procedures usually require using
clustering to account for the primary sampling units.
5.2.3 WEIGHTING
Sample weights are used to account for the
underrepresentation or overrepresentation of each
individual in the sample. When combining multiple years
of national health surveys, the weight needs to be divided
by the total years combined. Specific details and formulas
on how sampling weights are calculated are provided in
the analytic documentation for each complex national
health survey.5
5.3 SAS SURVEY PROCEDURES
To complete the following SAS SURVEY examples, data
from the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult file and Sample SAS
statements can be downloaded from the NHIS data
release website.
Complete the following:
b^@" Go to your b^@^\C:\b^@^] drive and create a folder named
b^@^\NHISb^@^]
b^@" In the b^@^\NHISb^@^] folder, create a folder named b^@^\18b^@^]
b^@" Download the 2018 Sample Adult ASCII data file
(.dat) from the 2018 NHIS data release website
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 65

b^@" Unzip the file and save it in the folder b^@^\C:\NHIS\
18b^@^]
b^@" Download b^@^\File 5.1 Sample SAS Program to
Create NHIS 2018 Sample Adult Fileb^@^] from the
Open ICPSR data repository
b^@" Open the file and select b^@^\Runb^@^] from the top menu
bar
Your analytic dataset should include the following 12
variables:
1. SRVY_YR
2. FPX
3. AGE_P
4. SEX
5. REGION
6. HIT1A
7. HIT2A
8. HIT3A
9. HIT4A
10. PPSU
11. PSTRATUM
12. WTFA_SA
The analytic dataset should include 3 more variables
(PPSU, PSTRATUM, WTFA_SA) than those collected in
Chapter 4. To determine the variables in the analytic
dataset, run a PROC CONTENTS statement. An example
of a PROC CONTENTS statement is provided in Box 4.1
66 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

in Chapter 4. If you are unable to create the permanent
analytic dataset using the preceding steps, you can go
to the Open ICPSR data repository, download b^@^\File 5.3
Permanent SAS Analytic Database,b^@^] and save the database
in the folder b^@^\C:\NHIS\18.b^@^]
Prior to conducting survey procedures, complex survey
data must be sorted by stratum and primary sampling
unit variables. You can enter the SAS syntax from Box 5.1
to sort the data.
BOX 5.1. SAS PROCEDURE FOR SORTING
ANALYTIC DATASET BY STRATUM AND
PRIMARY SAMPLING UNIT

5.3.1 SURVEY PROCEDURES FOR FREQUENCIES
AND PERCENTAGES
PROC SURVEYFREQ is the procedure for displaying
weighted frequencies and percentages in SAS for
complex surveys. Primary sampling unit, stratum, and
weighting variables must be included in the
programming statements. Enter the SAS syntax from Box
5.2 to determine the weighted frequencies for all
variables in the analytic dataset. Variable FPX is excluded
because it represents the ID number of the participant.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 67

Box 5.2. SAS SURVEY procedure (PROC SURVEYFREQ) for
determining frequencies in the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult
analytic dataset

The weighted frequencies for the variables collected
in this example are presented in Table 5.2. Although the
NHIS does not publish the weighted frequencies in the
dataset documentation on their website, other surveys,
such as the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)
and HINTS include the weighted results for data analysts
to verify their outputs are correct prior to conducting
additional analytic procedures.

68 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Table 5.2. Weighted frequencies for data collected in the 2018
NHIS Sample Adult Example analytic dataset
Variable Description (VARIABLE NAME)

Weighted Frequency

Survey Year (SRVY_YR)
2018

249,455,533

Sex (SEX)
1=Male

120,441,598

2=Female

129,013,935

Region (REGION)
1=Northeast

43,261,774

2=Midwest

54,817,888

3=South

92,043,276

4=West

59,332,595

Looked up health information on internet, past 12 months (HIT1A)
1=Yes

136,281,936

2=No

110,137,528

7=Refused
8=Not ascertained
9=Donb^@^Yt know

87,014
2,655,609
293,446

Filled a prescription on internet, past 12 months (HIT2A)
1=Yes

28,308,262

2=No

218,302,863

7=Refused
8=Not ascertained
9=Donb^@^Yt know

59,192
2,666,760
118,456

Table 5.2 (continued). Weighted frequencies for data collected in
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 69

the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult Example analytic dataset
Variable Description (VARIABLE NAME)

Weighted Frequency

Scheduled medical appointment on internet, past 12 months (HIT3A)
1=Yes

41,617,782

2=No

204,932,293

7=Refused
8=Not ascertained
9=Donb^@^Yt know

67,681
2,666,760
171,017

Communicated with health care provider by email, past 12 months
(HIT4A)
1=Yes

41,094,984

2=No

205,459,751

7=Refused
8=Not ascertained
9=Donb^@^Yt know

67,681
2,666,760
166,357

The variable for age (AGE_P) is excluded from the table
due to multiple response options (age 18 85 years and
older).
5.3.2 SURVEY PROCEDURES FOR MEANS
For continuous or discrete variables with multiple
responses (variable: AGE_P), summary statistics can be
used to verify the measure of central tendency (mean) and
total responses. PROC SURVEYMEANS is the procedure
used for displaying the mean and can be separated by
subgroups such as region and sex. Enter the SAS syntax
from Box 5.3 to determine the means for AGE_P
collectively and separated by sex in the analytic dataset.
Box 5.3. SAS SURVEY procedure (PROC SURVEYMEANS) for
70 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

verifying continuous discrete variable distributions in the 2018
NHIS Sample Adult analytic dataset

5.3.3 SURVEY PROCEDURES FOR CHI SQUARE
TESTS
Results pertaining to the first four research objectives
mentioned in section 5.1 can be calculated by using SAS
SURVEY procedures for chi square tests. IF THEN
procedures used to remove b^@^\refused,b^@^] b^@^\not ascertained,b^@^]
and b^@^\donb^@^Yt knowb^@^] responses for the dependent variables
are described in Section 4.3.1. SAS coding statements are
provided in Box 4.5.
As a reminder, the first four research objectives are:
b^@" Objective 5.1: To determine the association
between region (independent variable) and
looking up health information on the internet
(dependent variable)
b^@" Objective 5.2: To determine the association
between region (independent variable) and filling
prescriptions on the internet (dependent variable)
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 71

b^@" Objective 5.3: To determine the association
between region (independent and scheduling
appointments on the internet
b^@" Objective 5.4: To determine the association
between region and communicating with health
care provider by e mail
The independent (predictor or exposure) and dependent
(outcome) variables are identified in each objective.
PROC SURVEYFREQ is the procedure used to display
the crosstabulation of variables and calculation of the chi
square test result. You must add b^@^\ WCHISQb^@^] at the end of
the statement that begins with b^@^\tables.b^@^] You can calculate
the chi square test for each dependent variable separately
or you can run then together. You can enter the SAS
syntax from Box 5.3 to determine the chi square test
results.

72 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 5.4. SAS SURVEY Procedure (PROC SURVEYFREQ with
 WCHISQ) for running chi Square tests using 2018 NHIS Sample
Adult analytic dataset

5.3.4 SURVEY PROCEDURES FOR LOGISTIC
REGRESSION
As stated in Chapter 4, crude and adjusted logistic
regression models are used when the dependent
(outcome) variable is binary dichotomous.6 Crude and
multivariable logistic regression models can be used to
obtain results for research objective 5.5 in this chapterb^@^Ys
2018 NHIS Sample Adult example. As a reminder:
b^@" Objective 5.5: To determine the associations
between sex (independent variable) and each HIT
usage b^@^T looking up health information online,
filling prescriptions, scheduling appointments,
and communicating with a health care provider
by e mail b^@^T (dependent variables) before and after
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 73

controlling for other contributing factors
The independent (predictor or exposure) and dependent
(outcome) variables are identified in the objective. In this
example, the contributing factors that will be controlled
for to reduce bias are region and age. PROC
SURVEYLOGISTIC is the procedure used to calculate
the results after adjusting for the stratum, cluster and
weight variables. You can enter the SAS syntax provided
to determine the crude (Box 5.5) and multivariable (Box
5.6) results.

74 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 5.5. SAS SURVEY procedure (PROC SURVEYLOGISTIC) for
crude logistic regression results in the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult
analytic dataset

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 75

Box 5.6. SAS SURVEY procedure (PROC SURVEYLOGISTIC) for
multivariable logistic regression results in the 2018 NHIS
Sample Adult analytic dataset

The CLASS statement identifies the reference or
comparison group for the categorical independent
variable and other covariates. For the variable SEX,
females will be compared to males. In the analytic dataset,
males are represented by b^@^\1b^@^] and females are represented
by b^@^\2.b^@^] Therefore, the reference category is b^@^\1b^@^] so that our
results will represent the odds of females using HIT in
comparison to males. The MODEL statement is set up as
b^@^\dependent variable = independent variable (+ covariates
76 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

for multivariable analysis).b^@^] The DESCENDING
statement after the dependent variable identifies the
higher value as the outcome of interest. For each HIT
usage, b^@^\1=yesb^@^] will be the outcome that is modeled.
Therefore, our results will indicate the odds of using
health information technology instead of the odds of not
using health information technology.
5.4 SUMMARY
This chapter provided an overview of complex design
features of national health surveys and how to run SAS
SURVEY procedures to determine national estimates
using primarily categorical data. The examples used in
this chapter come from the 2018 NHIS Sample Adult
public use data files and focused on determining
associations between demographic factors (region, sex)
and HIT uses (look up health information, fill
prescriptions, schedule appointments, and communicate
with health care providers by e mail) among US adults.
SAS SURVEY procedures were demonstrated for
running frequencies, means, chi square tests, and logistic
regression models that account for the stratum, cluster,
and weight variables.

78 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

CHAPTER 6.

NATIONAL HEALTH INTERVIEW SURVEY

6.1 INTRODUCTION
Chapter 6 covers the National Health Interview Survey
(NHIS). The NHIS has been collected by the National
Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) since 1957 to
monitor and explore trends in the health status and
health care utilization among the US population.1 This
chapter includes details on: how data are collected; how
data are made publicly available as machine actionable
data files; what variables must be included to address
design features of the complex sample; the strengths and
limitations of the survey; and practical tips for
conducting statistical analysis; and how to answer
research questions using a case study. The practical tips
provided for analysis of NHIS data are based on the
primary authorb^@^Ys previous experiences analyzing NHIS
data from 2000 2018 to answer questions related
examining the associations between predisposing and
enabling factors that contribute to health behaviors,
morbidity, mortality and health services use. The NHIS
case study will explore whether Arab American adults are
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 79

more or less likely to receive an annual flu vaccine in
comparison to other racial ethnic groups, such as other
non Hispanic Whites. The bulk of this chapter will
comprise of section 6.6: NHIS Case Study in order to give
the reader hands on practice downloading and cleaning
large databases and conducting basic categorical data
analysis using PROC SURVEYFREQ and PROC
SURVEYLOGISTIC. The syntax provided was created
for use with SAS 9.4.
6.2 DATA COLLECTION
The NHIS uses a cross sectional study design to collect
face to face household interviews from the US civilian,
non institutionalized population to produce national
health estimates. The sample design excludes individuals
living in correctional facilities (e.g. prisons), long term
care institutions (e.g. nursing homes), military personnel,
and US nationals living overseas.1 The sample design is
modified every ten years after the decennial census.1
Prior to 2016, the NHIS used a multi stage area
probability design. The sample was drawn from over 400
primary sampling units (PSU) (counties, small groups of
counties, or metropolitan statistical areas) covering all 50
states and Washington, D.C. Within each PSU, addresses
were sampled and underrepresented minority groups
(non Hispanic Black, Hispanic, and non Hispanic Asian)
were oversampled. In 2016, the NHIS sample design was
modified to provide more robust estimates for state level
analysis. The multi stage process was removed and over
300 clusters located within the boundaries of each state
were used as sampling units.1 Instead of oversampling
racial and ethnic minority groups, the new design
80 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

oversamples certain populations within each state to
increase sample sizes among less populous states.2
Sample sizes have been increased in the 10 least populous
states and Washington D.C. and decreased in the 40 most
populous states.2 In 2019, a redesigned version of the
NHIS was implemented to reduce response burden for
participants, improve coverage of health topics,
streamline overlapping content with other national
health surveys, develop a long term plan for periodic and
ongoing topics, and incorporate new methodologies.2,3
Data for 2019 were not available as of this writing.
Further details of the NHIS sampling design and data
collection methods are reported on the NHIS website.4
6.3 DATA FILES
The NHIS is comprised of two main components: 1) core
questions that are consistently collected on an annual
basis and 2) an assortment of supplements sponsored by
other agencies outside of NCHS, such as National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute, Center for Tobacco Products,
and National Center for Environmental Health. Core
questionnaire sections include the family core (which
includes the household composition and person level
file), sample adult core and sample child core. In 2018,
supplemental questions focused on food security, health
care access and utilization among families, asthma,
occupational health, cancer screening, functioning and
disability (including cognitive disability), immunizations,
e cigarettes and other tobacco use, heart disease and
stroke among adults, and asthma and immunizations
among children.1

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 81

6.3.1 HOUSEHOLD FILE
One adult member of each household provides responses
to the household composition section of the NHIS
questionnaire. The participant provides relationship
information and demographics of all members of the
household to determine the number of families in each
housing unit.1 Each household has a unique identifier,
represented by variable HHX, which is used for merging
data files within and across years. The household data file
includes questions assessing the type of living quarters
(e.g. house, apartment, mobile home), number of families,
number of persons, and the US region (Northeast,
Midwest, South, West) where the household is located.1
6.3.2 FAMILY FILE
One adult member of each family within each household
is identified to answer questions about adult and child
members of the family. Any adults within the household
not designated as the b^@^\family respondentb^@^] can respond
for themselves.1 Each family is defined by groups of two
or more related persons living in the same household or
unrelated individuals living together, such as unmarried
couples.1 Each family has a unique identifier, represented
by variable FMX, which is used for merging data files
within and across years. The family data file includes
topics such as telephone use (landline, cell phones), family
type and structure, family member disabilities, family
level income, health insurance, and government assistant
programs (e.g. Womenb^@^Ys, Infants and Children [WIC]).

82 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

6.3.3 PERSON FILE
Person level data are collected as part of the family core
component for each household. Person level data are
collected from all adults and children in the household.
Each person has a unique identifier (variable name: PX
years 2000 2003; FPX years 2004 onward) which is used
for merging data files within and across years. The person
level data file includes topics such as demographics,
socioeconomics, health status, limitations of activity,
health care access and utilization, health insurance and
English language proficiency. Race and ethnicity are
collected in accordance with the 1997 Office of
Management and Budget standards.5
6.3.4 SAMPLE ADULT
One adult per family is randomly selected as a sample
adult. There is an increased likelihood of being selected
if the adult is non Hispanic Black, non Hispanic Asian,
Hispanic, or ages 65 years or older. The sample adult
responds to questions about their own health for this
section. If the participant is not mentally or physically
able to do so, questions about their health will be asked
to a proxy.1 Individuals represented as the sample adult
in each household are identified in the person level file
with a b^@^\flagb^@^] (variable: ASTATFLG). The sample adult file
includes individual level topics such as demographics,
socioeconomics, adult health conditions, adult health
status and activity limitations, health behaviors, health
care access and utilization, and additional selected items.
Additional selected items cover a wide range of health
and social determinants of health topics such as
frequency of computer use, satisfaction with health care
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 83

received, perceived neighborhood social cohesion, sexual
orientation and HIV testing.
6.3.5 SAMPLE CHILD
One child per family is randomly selected as a sample
child. Information about the sample child is collected
from an adult in the family that has the most knowledge
about the childb^@^Ys health.1 Individuals represented as the
sample child in the household are identified in the person
level file with a b^@^\flagb^@^] (variable: CSTATFLG). The sample
child file includes topics such as child health conditions,
limitations of activity, health status, child health care
access and utilization, child mental health, and child
influenza vaccination.
6.4 STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS
A strength of the NHIS is the ability to evaluate health
characteristics by many different sociodemographic
characteristics.1 Limitations of the NHIS include an
inability to calculate reliable statewide estimates.
Statewide estimates can only be calculated using data
from restricted data centers. All data collected are crosssectional and self reported. Although this is seen as a
limitation, in the context of preventive health services
research, previous studies have demonstrated that selfreported receipt of mammograms for early detection of
breast cancer and other preventive health services are
consistent with reports from medical providers and
electronic medical records.
6.5 DESIGN FEATURES
Data analysts must use special procedures to account for
84 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

the complex sample design used by the NHIS. Analytic
procedures must include variables to adjust for the
clustering, stratification, and weighting of each data file.
Each time the NHIS sample design has been modified,
the clustering and stratification variables were renamed.
An overview of the NHIS clustering and stratification
variables from 2000 through 2018 are provided in Table
6.1.
TABLE 6.1. OVERVIEW OF COMPLEX SAMPLE
DESIGN VARIABLES ACROSS NHIS DATA
COLLECTION YEARS
Survey Years

Clustering

Stratification

2000 2005

PSU

STRATUM

2006 2015

PSU_P

STRAT_P

2016 2018

PPSU

PSTRAT

Interim and annual weights are provided for each file.
The final annual weights are used to provide population
estimates. An overview of final annual weight variables
for each file type are provided in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2. Overview of NHIS final annual weight variables for
each file type
Household

Family

Person

Sample
Adult

Sample
Child

WTFA_HH

WTFA_FAM

WTFA

WTFA_SA

WTFA_SC

When combining multiple years of NHIS data, you must
divide the total annual weight by the total number of
years in the merge prior to conducting their statistical
analysis. For example, if combining data from sample
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 85

adults from 2014 2018, WTFA_SA should be divided by
5. An example of how to do this in SAS 9.4 is provided in
Box 6.1.
Box 6.1. SAS program to create new weight variable for five
years of NHIS data

6.6 NHIS CASE STUDY
Previous studies have demonstrated that Arab Americans
are less likely than US born Whites to receive preventive
services, including influenza vaccines. Previous research
using NHIS data has demonstrated that Arab American
women were 66% less likely (OR=0.34; 95%
CI=0.21 0.58) and Arab American men were 62% less
likely (OR=0.38; 95% CI=0.21 0.67) to receive a flu
vaccine when compared to their US born non Hispanic
White counterparts.6,7 These studies used restricted
2000 2011 NHIS data and created a variable for foreignborn Arab Americans. The Arab American ethnicity
group was limited to foreign born adults who were born
in 15 countries that belong to the Arab League of Nations
geographically located in the Middle East. In this case
study, we will determine whether the results are similar
using public use 2018 NHIS data. Arab Americans will
be defined as any adult who identified as self reporting a
White race, non Hispanic or Latino a ethnicity, and was
born in a country in the Middle East region based on
previous studies by the primary author and others.8 13
86 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

6.6.1 SPECIFIC AIMS
b^@" Aim 6.1: Compare sociodemographic and health
related characteristics of Arab Americans
compared to US born Whites and foreign born
non Hispanic Whites from Europe (including
Russia and Former USSR).
b^@" Aim 6.2: Determine associations between region
of birth and flu vaccine uptake among Arab
Americans compared to US born Whites and
foreign born non Hispanic Whites from Europe.
6.6.2 METHODS
Complete the following steps to download, clean, recode,
and analyze NHIS data to answer the specific aims.
Step 1: Download Person and Sample Adult datasets and SAS
programming files

The association between region of birth and flu vaccine
uptake can be examined using data from the NHIS person
and sample adult level files.
b^@" Go to the 2018 NHIS data release website
b^@" Click (+) next to b^@^\Data Filesb^@^]
b^@" Under Person File, click on b^@^\ASCII datab^@^] and save
to computer. A zip file will be downloaded which
contains the person file. Open the zip file and save
the data file to a permanent location on your
computer. It is recommended that you create a
folder on the b^@^XC Driveb^@^Y labeled NHIS and
separated by each year (e.g. b^@^\18b^@^] for b^@^\2018b^@^Y) so that
the location is consistent with the examples in this
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 87

textbook.
b^@" Under Person File, click on b^@^\Sample SAS
Statementsb^@^] and save the SAS programming
statements in the same folder as the data files on
your computer.
b^@" Under Sample Adult File, click on b^@^\ASCII datab^@^]
and save to your computer. A zip file will be
downloaded which contains the sample adult file.
Open the zip file and save the data file to a
permanent location on your computer. Similar to
the Sample Adult file, I recommend creating a
folder on the b^@^XC Driveb^@^Y labeled NHIS and
separated by each year (e.g. b^@^\18b^@^] for b^@^\2018b^@^Y) so that
the location is consistent with the examples in this
textbook.
b^@" Under Sample Adult File, click on b^@^\Sample SAS
Statementsb^@^] and save the SAS programming
statements in the same folder as the data file.
Step 2: Run SAS programming statements to create library and input
person and sample adult files

Sample SAS programs to create the libraries and input
the 2018 person and sample adult files are in provided
in Box 6.2 and Box 6.3, respectively. To create these
programming statements, complete the following steps:
Person Level SAS Programming File

b^@" Open the SAS Person Level Programming File
b^@" Create a LIBNAME statement which houses the
data and files associated with the analysis. It is
recommended that you create the LIBNAME
88 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

statement as the survey name (e.g. b^@^\NHISb^@^]) and
use the same location that the data files are saved
in on the C drive (e.g. b^@^\C:\NHIS\18b^@^])
b^@" Create a FILENAME statement which lets SAS
know where the data file is stored (e.g. b^@^XC:\NHIS\
18\PERSONSX.datb^@^Y)
b^@" Modify or remove any instructions ( *green
text* ) that you do not need in the programming
file.
b^@" Highlight all programming statements and click
RUN.
The full SAS program for the person file is available for
download in the Chapter 6 folder, in the Open ICPSR
data repository.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 89

Box 6.2. SAS Program to input 2018 NHIS person file

Sample Adult SAS Programming File

b^@" Open the SAS Sample Adult Level Programming
File.
b^@" Create a LIBNAME statement which houses the
data and files associated with the analysis. It is
recommended that you create the LIBNAME
statement as the survey name (e.g. b^@^\NHISb^@^]) and
use the same location that the data files are saved
in on the C drive (e.g. b^@^\C:\NHIS\18b^@^]).
90 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

b^@" Create a FILENAME statement which lets SAS
know where the data file is stored (e.g. b^@^XC:\NHIS\
18\SAMADULT.datb^@^Y).
b^@" Modify or remove any instructions ( *green
text* ) that you do not need in the programming
file.
b^@" Highlight all programming statements and click
RUN.
The full SAS program for the sample adult file is available
for download in the Chapter 6 folder, in the Open ICPSR
data repository.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 91

Box 6.3. SAS Program to input 2018 NHIS Sample Adult file

Step 3: Combine Person Level and Sample Adult Data using MERGE
statement

Once the data files have been input into SAS, the person
and sample adult files must be combined. First, create
a temporary file name for each file to indicate the type
of data file and the year (e.g. person18 and samadult18).
Second, sort each file by the household number (variable:
HHX) and family number (variable: FMX) prior to
merging. I also recommend using a KEEP statement to
keep only the variables that you need for the analysis
in your analytical dataset. Removing additional variables
92 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

will allow the SAS program to run and present results
faster. In this case study, I have kept the following
variables (Table 6.3) to denote the survey design features
and creation of the independent variable, dependent
variable and selected covariates.
Table 6.3. Overview of variables used for NHIS case study
File

Variable
Name

Variable Description

Design Variables
Person and Sample
Adult

SRVY_YR

Survey year

Person and Sample
Adult

HHX

Household number

Person and Sample
Adult

FMX

Family number

Person and Sample
Adult

FPX

Person number

Sample Adult

WTFA_SA

Final annual weight

Sample Adult

PPSU

Primary sampling unit

Sample Adult

PSTRAT

Stratum

Independent Variable
Person

REGIONBR

Region of birth

Person

HISCODI3

Race and ethnicity
combined

Dependent Variable
Sample Adult

FLUVACYR

Flu vaccine in past 12
months

Covariates
Sample Adult

AGE_P

Age

Sample Adult

SEX

Sex

Person

EDUC1

Highest level of education
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 93

Third, merge and sort the combined dataset with only the
variables from the person and sample adult files that are
needed for analysis designed to meet your research aims.
A sample SAS program for merging and sorting 2018
NHIS person and sample adult files is provided in Box
6.4.
Box 6.4. Sample SAS program to merge and sort NHIS person
and sample adult data

Step 4: Recode and rename variables

Questionnaire responses often need to be recoded or
responses collapsed prior to conducting statistical
analysis. For example, the NHIS has response options
b^@^\7=Refused,b^@^] b^@^\8=Not ascertained,b^@^] and b^@^\9=Donb^@^Yt knowb^@^]
for several questions. The responses are often removed
94 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

and made b^@^\missingb^@^] prior to analysis. Furthermore, the
numbers that represent certain values may need to be
changed for easier interpretation of statistical analysis
results. For example, NHIS has response options b^@^\1=Yesb^@^]
and b^@^\2=No.b^@^] It is common practice to change b^@^\nob^@^]
responses to 0, b^@^\0=No.b^@^] It is best practice to rename these
recoded variables with a new variable name instead of
replacing the original variable. Two or more variables
may need to be combined in order to create the
independent, dependent or other variables to answer
study aims. In this case study, the variable created to make
comparisons between US born non Hispanic Whites and
foreign born non Hispanic Whites from Europe and the
Middle East is created by combined two variables for 1)
race and ethnicity and 2) region of birth. The variables
recoded and renamed for analysis in this case study are
provided in Table 6.4.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 95

Table 6.4. Overview of NHIS variables recoded and renamed to
meet research aims
Question
Description

Race and
ethnicity

Region of
birth

Flu vaccine,
past 12
months

Original
Variable

Original
Responses

HISCODI3

1=Hispanic
2=Non Hispanic
White
3=Non Hispanic
Black
4=Non Hispanic
Asian
5 Non Hispanic
other races

01=United
States
02=Mexico,
Central
America,
Caribbean
Islands
03=South
America
04=Europe
REGIONBR
05 Russia (and
former USSR)
06=Africa
07=Middle East
08=Indian
Subcontinent
09=Asia
10=SE Asia
11=Elsewhere
99=Unknown

FLUVACYR

96 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

1=Yes
2=No
7=Refused
8=Not
ascertained
9=Donb^@^Yt know

Renamed
Variable

Recoded
Responses

1=US born
non Hispanic
White
2=Foreign born
RENGROUP non Hispanic
(represents White from
race,
Europe Russia
ethnicity
3=Foreign born
and nativity non Hispanic
group)
White from the
Middle East
(representing
Arab
Americans)

FLU_NEW

0=No
1=Yes

Table 6.4 (continued) Overview of NHIS variables recoded and
renamed to meet research aims

Question
Original
Description Variable

Age

Highest
level of
education

Original
Responses

Renamed
Variable

Recoded
Responses

AGE_NEW

1=18 34
years
2=35 54
years
3=55 64
years
4=65+ years

AGE_P

18 84=18 84
years
85=85+ years

EDUC1

00=Never
attended 
kindergarten only
01 12=1st
through 12th
grade, no diploma
13=GED or
1=Less than
equivalent
HS graduate
14=High school
2=HS
(HS) graduate
graduate 
15=Some college,
GED
no degree
3=Some
EDUC_NEW
16 17=Associateb^@^Ys
college 
degree programs
Associateb^@^Ys
18=Bachelorb^@^Ys
degree
degree
4=Bachelorb^@^Ys
19=Masterb^@^Ys
degree or
degree
higher
20 21=Doctorate
96=Child <5
97=Refused
98=Not
ascertained
99=Donb^@^Yt know

A sample SAS program for recoding and renaming 2018
NHIS data for this case study is provided in Box 6.5.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 97

Box 6.5. Sample SAS program to recode and rename NHIS
variables

Step 5: Conduct Descriptive Statistical Analysis

Once all variables are recoded, collapsed, and renamed
they can be used for statistical analysis. Statistical analysis
should always start with descriptive analysis to describe
the data source. Chi square analyses should be conducted
to make comparisons between the independent variable,
covariates, and dependent variables. It is important to
remember that all analysis of NHIS data needs to be
conducted with SAS survey procedures due to the
complex sample design. Weighting (variable: WTFA_SA),
clustering (variable: PPSU) and stratification (variable:
PSTRAT) variables must be included in the programming
statements. A sample SAS program for conducting chi 

98 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

square tests using 2018 NHIS data for this case study is
provided in Box 6.6.
Box 6.6. Sample SAS program for running descriptive statistics
(chi square)

Step 6: Conduct Inferential Statistical Analysis

After calculating descriptive statistics, inferential
statistical analysis can be conducted. Crude and
multivariable logistic regression models can be calculated
to determine associations between race, ethnicity, and
nativity status and flu vaccine uptake among US  and
foreign born non Hispanic Whites from Europe and the
Middle East. Crude logistic regression models are used to
determine the association between the independent and
dependent variables without adjusting for other factors.
Multivariable logistic regression models are used to
determine associations between the independent and
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 99

dependent variables after adjusting for potential
covariates (e.g. age, sex, highest level of education). A
reference category for the independent variable is
needed. For this analysis, the reference group is US born
non Hispanic Whites. Results from foreign born nonHispanic Whites from Europe and the Middle East are
presented in comparison to US born non Hispanic
Whites. A sample SAS program for conducting logistic
regression analysis using 2018 NHIS data for this case
study is provided in Box 6.7.
Box 6.7. Sample SAS program for running inferential statistics
(logistic regression)

100 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

6.7 SUMMARY
This chapter provided an overview of the NHIS and ways
to conduct basic statistical analysis using 2018 publicuse data files. The NHIS case study explored whether
foreign born Arab American adults were more or less
likely to receive an annual flu vaccine in comparison to
US born
non Hispanic
Whites.
Sample
SAS
programming
statements
were
provided
for
downloading and importing data files, merging data files,
recoding and renaming variables and conduction
categorical descriptive and inferential statistical analysis.
The dataset and full SAS programming statements for the
NHIS case study are available in the Chapter 6 folder, in
the Open ICPSR data repository.
104 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

conducted to try to locate other numbers. With this
change in methodology, the response rate lowered to 42%
from April to June 2020 in comparison to 59% obtained
from January to March 2020.14 NHIS data users may be
surprised that online methodologies were not adopted.
Instead of adjusting the household based sampling frame
to an internet modality, the NCHS utilized its Research
and Development Survey (RANDS) and the US Census
Bureau modified its Household Pulse Survey (HPS) to
provide real time data on COVID 19 for public health
and policy decision making.14
In 2020, there were four data collection methods used
by the NHIS. During quarter 1 (January through March
15th), data were collected using the CAPI system at
participantsb^@^Y households. During quarter 2 (March 19th
through June), surveys were collected by telephone.
During quarters 3 and 4 (July through December),
surveys were collected by telephone and in person. To
protect the safety of NHIS field workers and participants,
an attempt was made to collect data from each household
by telephone prior to conducting in person interviews.
If participants were not able to be reached by telephone,
or if any recruitment or survey materials needed to be
distributed, data were collected using in person
interviews. Safety precautions such as social distancing,
masking, and collecting data outside were used to protect
participants and NHIS field workers.14 From August
through December 2020, efforts were made to improve
response rates. A b^@^\follow backb^@^] survey was conducted by
telephone with the previous yearsb^@^Y adult participants.
This method allowed for increasing the sample size but
also allowed for comparisons to be made pre and post
the initial waves of the pandemic. From January through
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 105

April 2021, participants were surveyed first by telephone
and only in person as needed only if they were not
available by phone. Beginning May 2021, field workers
were allowed to collect data in person after assessing
their own personal health risks and community
transmission levels. An overview of the 2020 2021 data
collection timeline is provided in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1. NHIS data collection changes during COVID 19
pandemic

6.9.2 SURVEY CONTENT CHANGES
The NHIS also made changes to the survey content to
provide morbidity and health care services use data
during the pandemic. In 2020, adults and children
answered questions about COVID 19 diagnosis and
testing. Participants were asked whether they delayed or
skipped medical care or used telemedicine instead of inperson visits. Among adults only, questions were also
added to determine changes and delays in cancer care and
caregiving.14 Questions also assessed social distancing
measures in the workplace and changes in social and
106 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

emotional support needs in the last 12 months.14 In 2021,
addition questions were added on COVID 19
vaccinations.16
6.9.3 COMPLEX SAMPLE ANALYTIC CHANGES
The changes in the data collection procedures led to new
potential non response biases. Once the data collection
shifted to telephone, participants who were ages 65 and
older, had a bachelorb^@^Ys degree level of education or higher,
a family income greater than $75,000, owned a home, and
resided in that home for 11 years or longer had higher
response rates than other groups.15 Changes were made
to the NHIS weighting process from previous years.
Weights were already calibrated to the US Census
population estimates for age, sex, race, ethnicity,
education, and geographic areas. From April 2020
onward, weights were adjusted to account for housing
tenure.14,16
The 2020 NHIS public use data files are separated to
account for the changes in the complex sample. The four
data files include the: 1) sample adult interview; 2) sample
adult longitudinal; 3) sample adult partial; and 4) sample
child interview. The sample adult interview file includes
all adults who provided data during 2020. The sample
adult longitudinal file online includes the 2019 followback sample. The sample adult partial file does not
include the 2019 follow back participants. The sample
child interview file is the only file for children. An
overview of the weighting variables used for each of these
files is provided in Table 6.5.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 107

Table 6.5. Overview of 2020 NHIS final weight variables for each
file type
Sample Adult
Interview

Sample Adult
Longitudinal

Sample Adult
Partial

Sample Child
Interview

WTFA_A

WTFA_L

WTFA_P

WTFA_S

Details of the 2021 NHIS weighting procedures are not
available as of this writing. More information on changes
to the NHIS data collection procedures due to the
COVID 19 pandemic are available on the website.14,17

108 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

CHAPTER 7.

MEDICAL EXPENDITURE PANEL SURVEY

7.1 INTRODUCTION
Chapter 7 covers the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
(MEPS). The MEPS comprises a series of surveys from
families, individuals, employers and medical providers
that have been collected by the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ) since 1996. The purpose
of the MEPS is to estimate and monitor national trends
in health care use, medical costs and health insurance
coverage.1 This chapter includes details on: how data are
collected; how data are made publicly available as
machine actionable data files; what variables must be
included to address design features of the complex
sample; the strengths and limitations of the survey; and
practical tips for conducting statistical analysis; and how
to answer research questions using a case study. The
practical tips provided for analysis of MEPS data are
based on the authorb^@^Ys previous experiences analyzing
MEPS data from 2001 2017 to answer questions related
to associations between predisposing and enabling
factors that contribute to morbidity, mortality and health
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 109

services use. The MEPS case study will explore whether
adults who perceive their physician provided quality
patient provider communication (PPC) are more or less
likely to receive an annual flu vaccine in comparison
those who did not receive quality PPC. The bulk of the
chapter will comprise of section 7.6: MEPS Case Study
in order to give investigators hands on practice
downloading and cleaning large databases and
conducting basic categorical data analysis using PROC
SURVEYFREQ and PROC SURVEYLOGISTIC. The
syntax provided was created for use with SAS 9.4.
7.2 DATA COLLECTION
The MEPS uses a longitudinal panel design collecting
data from individuals and families from five rounds of
interviews over a two year period.2 Data can be compiled
for cross sectional analyses or longitudinal, retrospective
cohort designs. A subsample of household participants
who filled out the previous yearb^@^Ys National Health
Interview Survey (NHIS) are selected for each panel.
Oversampling of subgroups aligns with the NHIS
nationally representative sample design.2 For example,
non Hispanic Blacks and Hispanics were oversampled
until 2016. Non Hispanic Asians were oversampled from
2006 2015. In 2016, the new NHIS design was modified
to increase precision of statewide estimates and these
changes were reflected in the MEPS beginning in 2017.3
Data for 2018 onward were not available as of this
writing. Further details of the MEPS sampling design and
data collection methods are reported elsewhere.4

110 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

7.3 DATA FILES
The MEPS is comprised of two main components: 1)
household component and 2) medical provider
component. Each component includes multiple
subsections. The MEPS insurance component also
collects health insurance plan offerings from employers
in the US on an annual basis.5 Each annual household
consolidated and medical condition file represents data
from two panels. Each longitudinal file represents data
from one panel over a two year period. An overview of
file names for household consolidated, medical condition,
and longitudinal files from 2001 2018 by panel and year
are provided in Table 7.1.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 111

TABLE 7.1. OVERVIEW OF 2001 2018 MEPS
FILE NAMES BY YEAR AND PANEL
Year

Panels Household

Medical
Longitudinal
Condition

Years

Panel

2001

5 6

H60

H61

H65

2000 2001

5

2002

6 7

H70

H69

H71

2001 2002

6

2003

7 8

H79

H78

H80

2002 2003

7

2004

8 9

H89

H87

H86

2003 2004

8

2005

9 10

H97

H96

H98

2004 2005

9

2006

10 11

H105

H104

H106

2005 2006

10

2007

11 12

H113

H112

H114

2006 2007

11

2008

12 13

H121

H120

H122

2007 2008

12

2009

13 14

H129

H128

H130

2008 2009

13

2010

14 15

H138

H137

H139

2009 2010

14

2011

15 16

H147

H146

H148

2010 2011

15

2012

16 17

H155

H154

H156

2011 2012

16

2013

17 18

H163

H162

H164

2012 2013

17

2014

18 19

H171

H170

H172

2013 2014

18

2015

19 20

H181

H180

H183

2014 2015

19

2016

20 21

H192

H190

H193

2015 2016

20

2017

21 22

H201

H199

H202

2016 2017

21

2018

22 23

H209

H207

H210

2017 2018

22

7.3.1 HOUSEHOLD COMPONENT
An adult reference person from each household is
identified to answer questions about adults and child
members of the family.2 The household component
includes questions describing demographics (e.g. sex, age,
race ethnicity, education, marital status, nativity status,
112 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

English language proficiency), income level, health
insurance, access to health care, person level health
conditions (e.g. perceived health status and priority
health conditions b^@^S such as diabetes, hypertension,
cancer) preventive health services, limitations, and
disabilities. MEPS also assesses personal characteristics
of health care providers, including specialty type, race 
ethnicity, and sex, which can be used for studies
evaluating patient provider concordance. Child special
health care needs, behavioral problems, and preventive
care received at doctorsb^@^Y visits are also measured. Parents
are also asked to answer questions on health care quality
from the Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers
and
Systems
(CAHPSB)).
Self administered
questionnaires (SAQ) are also collected on a periodic
(2014 Preventive Care SAQ; 2016 2017 Cancer SAQ) and
consistent annual (SAQ, Diabetes Care Survey) basis.2
7.3.1.a. Self Administered Questionnaire (SAQ)

During rounds 2 and 4 of each panel, adult participants
are asked to complete and mail back a paper and pencil
SAQ which includes CAHPSB) questions assessing health
care quality received in the last 12 months. Sample
questions include whether or not participantsb^@^Y received
care right away, were offered help filling out forms, and
how they rate their health care (scale 0 10) with 0
representing the worst health care possible and 10
representing the best health care received. Additional
questions assess general health (e.g. smoking status),
health status, non specific psychological distress, and
depression.2

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 113

7.3.1.b. Diabetes Care Survey (DCS)

During rounds 3 and 5, adults who reported that they
were ever told by a doctor or other health professional
that they ever had diabetes receive an additional paperand pencil questionnaire to complete and mail back to
AHRQ.2 The DCS asks questions on diabetes care
treatment, monitoring, self efficacy, and ways that
individuals learn how to take care of their diabetes. For
example, participants are asked whether their diabetes is
being treated by diet modification, oral medication, and
insulin injections. To evaluate diabetes care monitoring,
participants are asked whether they have had their feet
checked, eye exam, blood cholesterol checked, received
a flu vaccine, and the number of times tested for
hemoglobin A1c in the past year. To determine diabetes
care self efficacy, participants are asked to rate their
confidence level in taking care of their diabetes from
1=not confident at all to 4=very confident.2
7.3.2 MEDICAL PROVIDER COMPONENT
After completion of household interviews, participants
are asked to provide permission for their medical
providers to be contacted to verify health information.
Medical providers are contacted by telephone to confirm
diagnostic and procedure codes, billing charges and
payments, utilization (number of medical events) and
dates of visits. From 2000 2016, International
Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical
Modification (ICD 9 CM) codes were assigned by
professional coders based on household interview
responses. From 2017 onward, coding transitioned to
include International Classification of Diseases, Tenth
114 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD 10 CM) codes.6
Information on utilization (number of medical events),
charges, and sources of payment are collected.2
Additional details on prescriptions medicines are
collected as part of the pharmacy subcomponent,
including medicine names, drug details and national drug
codes.6
7.3.3 LONGITUDINAL FILES
The MEPS is unique to other national health surveys
because it collects data from its participants five times
over a two year period, instead of one point in time. This
allow users to determine changes over the two year time
period and offers fewer temporal biases that may occur
when comparing exposures and outcomes during the
same year.7
7.4. STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS
A strength of the MEPS is that the survey collects data
from multiple sources (individuals, medical providers,
employers) on a large number of health services topics
not covered by other surveys, including use of medical
services, charges source of payments, provider
satisfaction, patient provider communication, provider
characteristics, and care coordination.2 Other advantages
include the ability to conduct longitudinal analysis with
each panel and the use of cross walk files to link to the
previous yearb^@^Ys NHIS data. A limitation of the MEPS is
that the samples sizes overlap for two years due to the
survey panel design. This means that there is a much
smaller sample size in comparison to other surveys. For
example, the NHIS had 78,132 total respondents in 2017
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 115

whereas the MEPS had only 30,716 respondents.2,8
Although the MEPS collects information on a wide
variety of physician characteristics, another limitation is
the underrepresentation of physician assistants and nurse
practitioners as advanced practice providers for
workforce research. Limited information is collected on
team based practice and non physician provider
practices.9
7.5. DESIGN FEATURES
Data analysts must use special procedures to account for
the complex sample design used by the MEPS.
Researchers must include variables to adjust for the
primary sampling units, clustering and weighting of each
annual data files. MEPS provides a primary sampling unit
and cluster variable for each year. Prior to 2002, MEPS
included the data collection year in the variable name
(VARPSU01, VARSTR01). Beginning in 2002, MEPS
removed the data collection year from the variable name,
which allows for a more streamlined approach when
combining data across years. An overview of the primary
sampling unit and cluster variables are provided in Table
7.2.
TABLE 7.2. OVERVIEW OF COMPLEX SAMPLE
DESIGN VARIABLES ACROSS MEPS DATA
COLLECTION YEARS
MEPS Survey Years

MEPS Primary
Sampling Unit

MEPS Cluster

2001

VARPSU01

VARSTR01

2002 2018

VARPSU

VARSTR

116 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

For studies that combine data from 2001 with 2002 or
later, researchers must change the variable name prior
to combining the datasets. This can be done by using
the RENAME statement. A sample SAS program for
renaming variables is provided in Box 7.1.
Box 7.1. Rename variable prior to combining with additional
years of MEPS data

Several annual weights are provided for each file. The
annual weights that include the year can be renamed
prior to combining with additional years of data. The
final person weight (e.g. PERWT17F) is used when
analyzing general responses from the household
consolidated and medical condition files. For research
projects focused on questions gathering data directly
from the SAQ (e.g. patient provider communication
quality), the self administered questionnaire weight (e.g.
SAQWT17F) should be used. For research projects
focused on questions gathering data directly from
individuals with diabetes (e.g. diabetes monitoring, selfefficacy), the final diabetes care supplement weight (e.g.
DIABW17F) should be used. An overview of final annual
weight variables for each file type for 2017 data are
provided in Table 7.3.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 117

Table 7.3. Overview of 2017 MEPS final annual weight variables
for each file type
Weight Type

Person

Medical
Condition

Longitudinal

Final Person Weight

PERWT17F

PERWT17F

LONGWT

Final Self Administered
Questionnaire Weight

SAQWT17F

b^@^T

LSAQWT

Final Diabetes Care
Supplement Weight

DIABW17F

b^@^T

b^@^T

When combining multiple years of MEPS data,
investigators must divide the total annual weight by the
total number of years in the merge prior to conducting
their statistical analysis. For example, if combining data
from individuals from 2013 2017, all final person weight
variables should be renamed and then divided by 5 in
SAS. An example of this coding is provided in Box 7.2.
Box 7.2. SAS program to rename and create new weight variable
for five years of MEPS data

7.6. MEPS CASE STUDY
Previous studies have produced mixed results on
associations between adultsb^@^Y perceptions of the qualities
of patient provider communication (PPC) received and
their likelihood of receiving preventive services. MEPS
118 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

measures several PPC qualities, including adultsb^@^Y
perceptions of how often their health care providers
b^@^\listened carefully to you,b^@^] b^@^\spent enough time with you,b^@^]
and b^@^\explained things in a way that was easy to
understandb^@^] in the last 12 months.1 Starting in 2011,
MEPS included additional PPC qualities which focus on
measuring health literate practices of health care
providers. These questions include how often in the last
12 months health care providers b^@^\give instructions on
what to do about as specific illness or health condition,b^@^]
b^@^\how often these instructions were easy to understandb^@^]
and whether the health care provider asked you b^@^\to
describe how you were going to followb^@^] their
instructions.2
Kindratt and colleagues previous research has
demonstrated that several qualities of PPC increased
adultsb^@^Y likelihood of receiving breast, cervical and
colorectal cancer screenings.10b^@^S12 For example, using
MEPS data, Kindratt and colleagues found that adults
who reported their provider always gave specific
instructions about what to do for their specific health
conditions had higher odds of receiving breast (OR=1.19;
95% CI=1.06 1.33) and colorectal (OR=1.23; 95%
CI=1.10 1.37) cancer screenings compared to those
whose providers did not give specific instructions.10
When disaggregated by race and ethnicity, non Hispanic
Black and Hispanic adults who reported their providersb^@^Y
exhibited all PPC qualities were more likely to receive
colorectal cancer screenings compared to those who did
not exhibit all qualities.12 A study by Villani & Mortensen
evaluated whether adults who reported their health care
provider always showed respect, involved them in
decision making, and explained all options were more
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 119

or less likely to receive an influenza vaccine compared
to adults whose providersb^@^Y did not exhibit these PPC
qualities.13 They found no association between each PPC
quality and adultsb^@^Y likelihood of receiving a flu vaccine.
More research evaluating other PPC qualities, such as
health literate practices by providers (providing clear
communication, practicing b^@^\teach backb^@^] method), are
needed to further explore this association. In this case
study, we will determine the association between two
PPC qualities and adultsb^@^Y likelihood of receiving an
influenza vaccine using 2015 and 2016 MEPS household
consolidated data.
7.6.1 SPECIFIC AIMS
b^@" Aim 7.1: Compare sociodemographic and healthrelated characteristics of adults by influenza
vaccine uptake
b^@" Aim 7.2: Determine association between adultsb^@^Y
perceptions of PPC qualities and their likelihood
of receiving an influenza vaccine before and after
controlling for covariates
7.6.2 METHODS
Complete the following steps to download, clean, recode
and analyze MEPS data to answer the specific aims.
Step 1: Download Household Consolidated datasets and SAS
programming files

The associations between PPC qualities and influenza
vaccine uptake can be examined using data from the
MEPS household consolidated data files.
120 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

b^@" Go to the MEPS website for household full year
consolidated data files.
b^@" Click on b^@^\HC 181b^@^] for 2015 Full Year
Consolidated Data File. Under b^@^\Datab^@^] and b^@^\File
type***,b^@^] click on b^@^\ZIPb^@^] next to b^@^\Data File, ASCII
formatb^@^] and save the file to your computer. A zip
file will be downloaded which contains the
household consolidated file. Open the zip file and
save the data file to a permanent location on your
computer. I recommend creating a folder on the
b^@^XC Driveb^@^Y labeled MEPS and separated by each
year (e.g. b^@^\15b^@^] for b^@^\2015b^@^Y) so that the location is
consistent with the examples in this textbook.
b^@" Under b^@^\Documentationb^@^] and b^@^\File Type,b^@^] click on
b^@^\TXTb^@^] next to the label b^@^\SAS Programming
Statements.b^@^] Open your SAS program then copy
and paste the text into the SAS editor. Save the
SAS programming statements in the same folder
as the data file.
b^@" Repeat the previous steps for obtaining,
downloading and saving 2016 household
consolidated data.
Step 2: Run SAS programming statements to create library and input
2015 and 2016 MEPS household consolidated data files

Sample SAS programs to create the libraries and input the
2015 and 2016 MEPS household consolidated data files
are provided in Box 7.3 and Box 7.4, respectively. The full
SAS programs are available for download in the chapter 7
folder of the Open ICPSR data repository.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 121

2015 MEPS Full Year Consolidated SAS Programming File

b^@" Open the SAS Full Year Consolidated
Programming File
b^@" Remove any unnecessary instructions within
programming file. Labels and formats can be
removed since all variables will be recoded when
you complete your analysis.
b^@" Create a LIBNAME statement which houses the
data and files associated with the analysis. I
recommend creating the LIBNAME statement as
the survey name (e.g. b^@^\MEPSb^@^]) and using the same
location that the data files for saved in on the C
drive (e.g. b^@^\C:\MEPS\15b^@^])
b^@" Create a FILENAME statement which lets SAS
know where the data file is stored (e.g. b^@^XC:\MEPS\
15\H181.datb^@^Y)
b^@" Highlight all programming statements and click
RUN.

122 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 7.3. SAS Program to input MEPS HC 181: 2015 Full Year
Consolidated Data File

2016 MEPS Full Year Consolidated SAS Programming File

b^@" Open the SAS Full Year Consolidated
Programming File
b^@" Remove any unnecessary instructions within
programming file. Labels and formats can be
removed since all variables will be recoded when
you complete your analysis.
b^@" Create a LIBNAME statement which houses the
data and files associated with the analysis. I
recommend creating the LIBNAME statement as
the survey name (e.g. b^@^\MEPSb^@^]) and using the same
location that the data files are saved in on the C
drive (e.g. b^@^\C:\MEPS\16b^@^])
b^@" Create a FILENAME statement which lets SAS
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 123

know where the data file is stored (e.g. b^@^XC:\MEPS\
16\H192.datb^@^Y)
b^@" Highlight all programming statements and click
RUN.
Box 7.4. SAS Program to input MEPS HC 192: 2016 Full Year
Consolidated Data File

Step 3: Combine 2015 and 2016 Full Year Consolidated Files using
MERGE statement

Once the data files have been input into SAS, the annual
files must be combined. First, create a temporary file
name for each file to indicate the type of data file and
the year (e.g. meps15 and meps16). Second, sort each file
by the participant id number (variable: DUPERSID) and
panel (variable: PANEL) prior to merging. I also
recommend using a KEEP statement to keep only the
variables that you need for the analysis in your analytical
124 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

dataset. Removing additional variables will allow the SAS
program to run and present results faster. For MEPS,
rename any variables that include the year in the name
(e.g. PERWT15F= PERWTF, PERWT16F= PERWTF)
prior to merging data across years. In this case study, I
have kept the following variables (Table 7.4) to denote the
survey design features and creation of the independent
variable, dependent variable and selected covariates.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 125

Table 7.4. Overview of variables used for MEPS case study
Variable
Name

Variable Description

Design Variables
PANEL

Panel number

DUPERSID

Person ID (Dwelling unit + person number)

SAQWT15F

Final SAQ person weight, 2015

SAQWT16F

Final SAQ person weight, 2016

VARPSU

Primary sampling unit

VARSTR

Stratum (clustering)

Independent Variables
ADINST42

SAQ 12 Months: Dr. gave specific instructions (Rounds 4 
2)

ADEZUN42

SAQ 12 Months: Dr. given instructions were easy to
understand (Rounds 4 2)

ADTLHW42

SAQ 12 Months: Dr. asked to describe how you will
follow instructions (Rounds 4 2)

Dependent Variable
FLUSHT53

How long since last flu vaccination (Rounds 5 3)

Covariates Inclusion Criteria
ADAPPT42

SAQ 12 Months: # visits to medical office for care
(Rounds 4 2)

AGELAST

Age

SEX

Sex

RACETHX

Race Ethnicity

Third, merge and sort the combined dataset with only the
variables from the 2015 and 2016 full consolidated files
that are needed to meet your research aims. A sample SAS
program for merging and sorting 2015 2016 MEPS full
year consolidated files is provided in Box 7.5.
126 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 7.5. Sample SAS program to merge and sort 2015 2016
MEPS full year consolidated data files

Step 4: Recode and rename variables

Questionnaire responses often need to be recoded or
responses collapsed prior to conducting statistical
analysis. For example, the MEPS has response options
b^@^\ 9=Not ascertained,b^@^] b^@^\ 8=Donb^@^Yt know,b^@^] b^@^\ 7=Refused,b^@^]
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 127

and b^@^\ 1=Inapplicableb^@^] for several questions. The
responses are often removed and made b^@^\missingb^@^] prior to
analysis. Furthermore, the numbers that represent certain
values may need to be changed for easier interpretation
of statistical analysis results. For example, MEPS has
response options b^@^\1=Yesb^@^] and b^@^\2=No.b^@^] It is common
practice to change b^@^\nob^@^] responses to 0, b^@^\0=No.b^@^] It is best
practice to rename these recoded variables with a new
variable name instead of replacing the original variable.
An overview of the variables recoded and renamed for
analysis in this case study is provided in Table 7.5.

128 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Table 7.5. Overview of MEPS variables recoded and renamed to
meet research aims.
Question
Original
Description Variable

Original
Responses

Instructions
easy to
ADEZUN42
understand

 9=Not
ascertained
 1=Inapplicable
1=Never
2=Sometimes
3=Usually
4=Always

 9=Not
Asked to
ascertained
describe
 1=Inapplicable
how you
ADTLHW42 1=Never
will follow
2=Sometimes
instructions
3=Usually
4=Always

Renamed
Variable

Recoded
Responses

EASY

0=Not Always
(combine never,
sometimes,
usually
responses)
1=Always

FOLLOW

0=Not Always
(combine never,
sometimes,
usually
responses)
1=Always

FLU_NEW

0=Not within
past year
(combine past 2
years, 3 years, 5
years, >5 years,
never)
1=Within past
year

1=18 44 years
AGE_NEW 2=45 64 years
3=65 and older

How long
since last
flu vaccine

FLUSHT53

 9=Not
ascertained
 8=Donb^@^Yt know
 7=Refused
 1=Inapplicable
1=Within past
year
2=Within 2
years
3=Within 3
years
4=Within 5
years
5=>5 years
6=Never

Age

AGELAST

0 85 years

RACETHX

1=Hispanic
2=Non Hispanic
White
3=Non Hispanic
Black
RACEETH
4=Non Hispanic
Asian
5=Non Hispanic
other multiple

Race 
Ethnicity

1=Hispanic
2=Non Hispanic
White
3=Non Hispanic
Black
4=Non Hispanic
Other (including
Asian multiple)

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 129

A sample SAS program for recoding and renaming MEPS
data for this case study is provided in Box 7.6.
Box 7.6. Sample SAS program to recode and rename MEPS
variables

Step 5: Conduct Descriptive Statistical Analysis

Once all variables are recoded, collapsed, and renamed
they can be used for statistical analysis. Statistical analysis
should always start with descriptive analysis to describe
the data source. Chi square analyses should be conducted
to make categorical comparisons between the
independent variable, covariates, and dependent
130 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

variables. It is important to remember that all analysis
of MEPS data needs to be conducted with SAS survey
procedures due to the complex sample design. Weighting
(variable: SAQWTF), primary sampling unit (variable:
VARPSU) and cluster (variable: VARSTR) variables must
be included in the programming statements.
A sample SAS program for conducting chi square tests
using MEPS data for this case study is provided in Box
7.7.
Box 7.7. Sample SAS program for running descriptive statistics
(chi square)

Step 5: Conduct Inferential Statistical Analysis

After calculating descriptive statistics, inferential
statistical analysis can be conducted. Crude and
multivariable logistic regression models can be calculated
to determine associations between each quality of PPC
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 131

(gave instructions that were easy to understand, asked
you to describe how you will follow instructions) and
flu vaccine uptake in the last 12 months. Crude logistic
regression models are used to determine the association
between the independent and dependent variables
without adjusting for other factors. Multivariable logistic
regression models are used to determine associations
between the independent and dependent variables after
adjusting for potential covariates (e.g. age, race ethnicity).
Reference categories for the independent variables are
needed. For this analysis, the reference group is b^@^\not
always.b^@^] Results compare adults who reported their health
care provider b^@^\alwaysb^@^] exhibited each PPC quality to
those whose provider did b^@^\not alwaysb^@^] exhibit each
specific PPC quality. A sample SAS program for
conducting logistic regression analysis using MEPS data
for this case study is provided in Box 7.8.

132 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 7.8. Sample SAS program for running MEPS inferential statistics
(logistic regression)

7.7 SUMMARY
This chapter provided an overview of the MEPS and
ways to conduct basic statistical analysis using 2015 2016
public use data files. The MEPS case study explored
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 133

whether adults whose health care providerb^@^Ys always
demonstrated clear communication (gave instructions
that were easy to understand) and the teach back method
(asked them to describe how they will follow instructions)
were more likely to receive a flu vaccine. Sample SAS
programming
statements
were
provided
for
downloading and inputting data files, merging data files,
recoding and renaming variables, and conducting
categorical descriptive and inferential statistical analysis.
The dataset and full SAS programming statements for the
MEPS case study are available n the Chapter 7 folder, in
the Open ICPSR data repository.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 137

CHAPTER 8.

HEALTH INFORMATION NATIONAL TRENDS
SURVEY

8.1 INTRODUCTION
Chapter 8 covers the Health Information National Trends
Survey (HINTS). The HINTS has been collected by the
National Cancer Institute (NCI) since 2003 to monitor
national trends in health communication, information
technology use, and knowledge, attitudes, and practices
towards cancer prevention and care.1 The first iteration
(HINTS 1) was collected in 2003. HINTS 2 and HINTS
3 were collected in 2005 and 2007 2008 respectively.
Beginning with HINTS 4, data collection was split into
cycles. HINTS 4 has four cycles collected in 2011 (Cycle
1), 2012 (Cycle 2), 2013 (Cycle 3) and 2014 (Cycle 4).
In 2015, the United States Federal Drug Administration
(FDA) partnered with the NCI to evaluate tobacco use
and related communications, and public knowledge,
beliefs, and behaviors regarding dietary supplements and
medical products.1 This chapter includes details on: how
data are collected; how data are made publicly available
as machine actionable data files; what variables must be
138 BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY

included to address design features of the complex
sample; the strengths and limitations of the survey; and
practical tips for conducting statistical analysis; and how
to answer research questions using a case study. The
practical tips provided for analysis of HINTS data are
based on the authorb^@^Ys previous experiences analyzing
HINTS 4 data to answer questions related to associations
between predisposing and enabling factors that
contribute to morbidity, mortality and health services
use. The HINTS case study will explore how e mail
communication between patients and health care
providers between visits influences colon cancer
screening uptake. The bulk of the chapter will comprise
of section 8.6: Case Study in order to give the reader
hands on practice downloading and cleaning large
databases and conducting basic categorical data analysis
using
PROC
SURVEYFREQ
and
PROC
SURVEYLOGISTIC. The syntax provided was created
for use with SAS 9.4.
8.2 DATA COLLECTION
Data collection methods for HINTS have evolved over
the past 17 years to increase participation using
information technology. Surveys can be completed in
English or Spanish. The sampling frame includes two
strata to ensure inclusion of minority and non minority
populations. The most recent iteration as of this writing
(HINTS 5 Cycle 3) includes self administered and webbased options. Prior to HINTS 5, self administered
questionnaires were collected by mail.1 HINTS 5 Cycle 3
included as b^@^\web pilotb^@^] with two experimental conditions
(b^@^\Web Optionb^@^] or b^@^\Web Bonusb^@^]). Participants randomly
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 139

selected for the Web Option group choose whether they
wanted to complete the survey by paper or online. Other
participants randomly selected for the Web Bonus group
were given the same choices but offered a $10 incentive
to complete the survey online. Participants recruited to
complete the self administered questionnaire by mail
received the initial survey, a reminder postcard, and up
to two follow up mailings with additional copies of the
survey. Participants recruited to complete the web based
options received instructions by mail with a website link
and pin number access code to complete the survey. It
was requested that the adult with the b^@^\next birthdayb^@^] in
the household complete the questionnaires. For example,
if there were two adults in the household (one with a
birthday in May, the other birthday was in October), the
adult whose birthday was in May would be requested
to fill out the survey if it was receiving in January. A
$2 incentive was included with this questionnaire to
promote participation. HINTS 5 Cycle 4 data were not
available as of this writing. Further details of the HINTS
sample design and data collection methods are reported
on the HINTS website and published research.1b^@^S4
8.3 DATA FILE
The HINTS is comprised of one data file per cycle, which
can be combined with other iterations and cycles to
increase sample size. Each HINTS administration
includes questions related to the measurement of the
following
core
constructs:
sociodemographics;
technology use and access; health care use and access;
health information seeking; cancer prevention and
screening knowledge and behavior; cancer risk
140 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

perceptions; and cancer related behavior.2 The HINTS 3
Cycle 5 questionnaire includes questions related to the
following 15 topics, represented by A through O (no
Section I):5
b^@" A) Looking for health information
b^@" B) Using the internet to find information
b^@" C) Your health care
b^@" D) Medical records
b^@" E) Caregiving
b^@" F) Your overall health
b^@" G) Health and nutrition
b^@" H) Physical activity and exercise
b^@" J) Sun & UV exposure
b^@" K) Tobacco products
b^@" L) Cancer screening and awareness
b^@" M) Your cancer history
b^@" N) Beliefs about cancer
b^@" O) You and your household
8.4. STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS
A strength of the HINTS is its measurement of the rapidly
changing health information and communication
landscape using nationally representative samples. The
HINTS is unique in its ability to provide data on cancer
patients and survivors. The public use data tools are
easily and readily available on the website and several
supporting documents are provided to support data
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 141

users.6 HINTS abides by the Findability, Accessibility,
Interoperability, and Reusability (FAIR) principles for
data management.2 Several survey questions are collected
across survey iterations and cycles allowing for the
examination of trends over time or collapsing to increase
the sample size. Despite its strengths as a cross sectional
survey, results from the HINTS cannot be used to
determine causality. Questions measuring health
behaviors during the same time period (e.g. last 12
months) may suffer from temporality bias due to the
inability to determine whether an exposure (e.g.
communication with health care provider by e mail or
patient portal) occurred before the outcome (e.g. cancer
screenings). Due to the small sample size, statewide
estimates cannot be determined. However, the HINTS
allows for regional estimates by Census region and
divisions. Similar to other national health surveys,
response rates have decreased over time. HINTS results
may be biased due to large numbers of missing data.
However, the HINTS recommends jackknife weighting
processes, instead of Taylor Linearization methods, to
address this bias.7
8.5. DESIGN FEATURES
Data analysts must use special procedures to account for
the complex sample design used by the HINTS. Although
analysts can use complex survey methods similar to other
national health surveys (e.g. cluster, stratification
variables), the recommended approach for analyzing
HINTS data is to use jackknife replicate weights to ensure
the computation of the correct variance estimates.8 Each
HINTS cycle includes a set of 50 replicate weights. A final
142 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

sample weight is used to calculate population estimates
and 50 replicate weights are used to calculate accurate
standard errors of the estimates for the combined sample.
A final sample weight is used to calculate population
estimates and 50 replicate weights are used to calculate
accurate standard errors of the estimates for the paperonly sample. Then, a final sample weight is used to
calculate population estimates and 50 replicate weights
are used to calculate accurate standard errors of the
estimates for the web option sample. Next, a final sample
weight is used to calculate population estimates and 50
replicate weights are used to calculate accurate standard
errors of the estimates for the web bonus sample. Finally,
a final sample weight is used to calculate population
estimates and 150 replicate weights are used to calculate
accurate standard errors of the estimates for the
combined sample, controlling for group differences.
Although not the recommended approach for population
estimates, stratum and cluster variables are available for
analysis using Taylor series linearization methods.8 An
overview of the weights, cluster and stratum variables are
provided in Table 8.1.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 143

TABLE 8.1. OVERVIEW OF IMPORTANT
ANALYTIC VARIABLES FOR WEIGHTING AND
COMPLEX SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS, HINTS 5
CYCLE 3
Jackknife Replication
Methods
Final Sample
Weight

Combined
Sample
Taylor
Linearization
TG_all_FINWT0
Methods
VAR_STRATUM
and
VAR_CLUSTER

Replicate
Weights

Degrees
of
Freedom

TG_all_FINWT0
through
TG_all_FINWT50

49

Paper Only

TG1_all_FINWT0
TG1_all_FINWT0 through
49
TG1_all_FINWT50

Web Option

TG2_all_FINWT0
TG2_all_FINWT0 through
49
TG2_all_FINWT50

Web Bonus

TG3_all_FINWT0
TG3_all_FINWT0 through
49
TG3_all_FINWT50

Combined
Sample
(Control for
Group
Differences)

NWGT0

144 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

NWGT0 through
NWGT150

147

8.6. HINTS CASE STUDY: THE INFLUENCE OF
E MAIL PPC ON COLON CANCER SCREENING
Communicating with health care providers by e mail,
patient portals, mobile applications and text messaging
has increased substantially over the past several years.
E mail patient provider communication (PPC) describes
the communication between health care providers and
patients between visits using e mail or direct
communication through patient portals.9 E mail PPC use
differs by age, sex, education, race ethnicity, and history
of chronic diseases such as diabetes and hypertension.9
Few studies have evaluated how e mail PPC may improve
individualb^@^Ys likelihood of receiving preventive services.
Kindratt and colleagues previous research found mixed
results when evaluating the influence of e mail PPC on
preventive service utilization. Using National Health
Interview Survey data, they found that adults who used
e mail to communicate with their provider had greater
odds of reporting they received an influenza vaccine,
mammogram, pap test, and colon cancer screening in the
past 12 months.10 11 However, using HINTS 4 Cycles 1
through 4 data, Kindratt and colleagues did not find any
associations between e mail PPC and cancer screening
uptake.12 In this case study, we will determine the
association between e mail PPC and adultsb^@^Y likelihood of
receiving a colon cancer screening using HINTS 5 Cycle
3 data.
8.6.1 SPECIFIC AIMS
b^@" Aim 8.1: Compare sociodemographic and healthrelated characteristics of adults who use e mail to
communicate with their health care provider
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 145

b^@" Aim 8.2: Determine associations between e mail
PPC and adultsb^@^Y likelihood of receiving a colon
cancer screening before and after controlling for
covariates.
8.6.2 METHODS
Complete the following steps to download, clean, recode
and analyze HINT 5 Cycle 3 data to answer the specific
aims.
Step 1: Download HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Public Use Data Files

b^@" Go to the HINTS website to access public use data
for download
b^@" Review b^@^\HINTS Data Terms of Useb^@^]
b^@" Check the box at the bottom to indicate you will
comply with terms of use
b^@" Enter your e mail address and click b^@^\Acceptb^@^]
b^@" You will be taken to an updated page with b^@^\Public
Use Datasetsb^@^]
b^@" Under the heading b^@^\HINTS 5, Cycle 3 (2019)
dataset, updated March 2020,b^@^] click on the b^@^\SAS
data and supporting documentsb^@^] link to download
a zip file
b^@" Unzip the file and save the documents to your
computer. I recommend creating a folder on the
b^@^\C Driveb^@^] labeled HINTS and separated by each
iteration (if using more than 1 iteration or cycle).
This will be consistent with the location
statements used in the textbook examples (HINTS
5.3 representing HINTS 5 Cycle 3).
146 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

The downloaded zip file should contain the following
files:
1. HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Public Codebook
2. HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Public Format Assignments
3. HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Public Formats
4. HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Public History Document
5. HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Survey Overview & Data
Analysis Recommendations
6. HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Methodology Report
7. HINTS 5 Cycle 3 SAS Public Use Dataset
8. HINTS 5 Cycle3 Annotated Instruments English
and Spanish
9. HINTS 5 Cycle3 Web Pilot Results Report
The most useful files for conducting the statistical
analysis in SAS are the public codebook, public format
assignments, public formats, and public use dataset files.
The public codebook contains an overview of all variable
names, labels, formats, response options, weighted and
unweighted sample sizes and proportions. SAS
programming statements (.sas files) are provided in the
public format assignments and public formats files. The
statements can be used to apply labels to your data file.
For example, if you do not use the formatting files, your
outputs will read b^@^\1b^@^] as responses instead of b^@^\yesb^@^] to
indicate the actual responses from the survey. The public
use dataset files include the responses to each variable in
numerical format.
Step 2: Run SAS programming statements to create library and labels
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 147

for HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Data

Sample SAS programs to create the libraries and format
the HINTS 5 Cycle 3 data with labels are provided in Box
8.1 and Box 8.2, respectively. The full SAS programs are
available for download in the chapter 8 folder in the Open
ICPSR data repository.
HINTS 5 Cycle 3 SAS Public Formats File

b^@" Open the HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Public Formats File
b^@" Create a LIBNAME statement that houses the
data and files associated with the analysis. I
recommend creating the LIBNAME statement as
the survey name (e.g. b^@^\HINTSb^@^]) and using the
same location that the data files for saved in on
the C drive (e.g. b^@^\C:\HINTS\HINTS 5.3b^@^])
b^@" Highlight all programming statements and click
RUN.

148 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 8.1. SAS program for public formats, HINTS 5 Cycle 3

HINTS 5 Cycle 3 SAS Public Format Assignments File

b^@" Open the HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Public Format
Assignments file
b^@" Enter the LIBNAME in the b^@^\options fmtsearchb^@^]
statement and update file name
b^@" Highlight all programming statements and click
RUN

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 149

Box 8.2. SAS program for public format assignments, HINTS 5
Cycle 3

Step 3: Select Variables for HINTS 5 Cycle 3 Analysis

Once formats and labels have been assigned to the
dataset, you can remove any variables that are not needed
for your analysis. This will reduce the size of the dataset
and make processing time quicker when running SAS
programming statements. In this case study, I have kept
the following variables (Table 8.2) to denote the survey
design features and creation of the independent variable,
dependent variable and selected covariates.

150 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Table 8.2. Overview of variables used for HINTS case study
Variable Name

Variable Description

Design Variables
TG_all_FINWT0

Final person level sample weight b^@^S all
modalities combined

TG_all_FINWT1 b^@^S
TG_all_FINWT50

Final person level replicate weights 1 50 b^@^S all
modalities combined

Independent Variables
In the past 12 months have you used a
computer, smart phone, or other electronic
Electronic Talk Doctor
means to use e mail or the internet to
communicate with a doctor?
EverTestedColonCa

Have you ever had one of these tests to check
for colon cancer?

Covariates Inclusion Criteria
FreqGoProvider

In the past 12 months, not counting times you
went to an emergency room, how many times
did you go to a doctor, nurse, or other
health professional to get care for yourself?

Age

What is your age?

SelfGender

Self reported gender

Race Cat2

Derived variable to categorize responses given
in O6 (Race)

Step 4: Recode and rename variables

Questionnaire responses often need to be recoded or
responses collapsed prior to conducting statistical
analysis. For example, the HINTS has response options
b^@^\ 9=Missing Data (Not ascertained)b^@^] and b^@^\ 7=Missing
data (Web partial, Question Never Seen)b^@^] for several
questions. The responses are often removed and made
b^@^\missingb^@^] prior to analysis. Furthermore, the numbers
that represent certain values may need to be changed
for easier interpretation of statistical analysis results. For
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 151

example, HINTS has response options b^@^\1=Yesb^@^] and
b^@^\2=No.b^@^] It is common practice to change b^@^\nob^@^] responses
to 0, b^@^\0=No.b^@^] It is best practice to rename these recoded
variables with a new variable name instead of replacing
the original variable.
An overview of the variables recoded and renamed for
analysis in this case study is provided in Table 8.3.
Table 8.3. Overview of HINTS variables recoded and renamed to
meet research aims

Question
Description

Original
Variable

Original
Responses

Renamed
Variable

Recoded
Responses

In the past
12 months
have you
used a
computer,
 9=Missing
smart phone,
data
or other
(Not
0=No
electronic
Electronic TalkDoctor
EMAIL PPC
Ascertained)
1=Yes
means to use
1=Yes
e mail or the
2=No
internet to
communicate
with a doctor
or a doctorb^@^Ys
office?
Have you
ever had one
of these tests
to check for
colon
cancer?

EverTestedColonCa

152 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

 9=Missing
data
 7=Missing
data (Web
partial)
1=Yes
2=No

COL NEW

0=No
1=Yes

Table 8.3 (continued). Overview of HINTS variables recoded and
renamed to meet research aims

Question
Original
Description Variable

Original
Responses

Renamed
Variable

Recoded
Responses

What is
your age?

Age

 9=Missing data
(Not
1=50 59
Ascertained)
years
 4=Unreadable
2=60 69
AGE NEW
non conforming
years
numeric
3=70 and
response
older
18 98 years

Self:
Gender

 9=Missing data
(Not
Ascertained)
 7=Missing data
SelfGender (Web partial b^@^S
GENDER
Question Never
Seen)
1=Male
2=Female

1=Male
2=Female

A sample SAS program for recoding and renaming
HINTS 5 Cycle 3 data for this case study is provided in
Box 8.3.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 153

Box 8.3. Sample SAS program to recode and rename HINTS
variables

Step 5: Conduct Descriptive Statistical Analysis

Once all variables are recoded, collapsed, and renamed
they can be used for statistical analysis. Statistical analysis
should always start with descriptive analysis to describe
the data source. Chi square analyses should be conducted
to make categorical comparisons between the
independent variable, covariates, and dependent
variables. It is important to remember that all analysis
of HINTS data needs to be conducted with SAS Survey
154 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

procedures due to the complex sample design. It is
recommended to use the final sample weights (variable:
TG all FINWT0),
replicate
weights
(variables
TG all FINWT1 to TG all FINWT50) and degrees of
freedom (50 1=49) for the b^@^\delete oneb^@^] jackknife
replication method. More details on the replicate
weighting are available in the HINTS 5 Cycle 3
Methodology Report.8
A sample SAS program for conducting chi square tests
using HINTS Cycle 3 data for this case study is provided
in Box 8.4.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 155

Box 8.4. Sample SAS program for running descriptive statistics
(chi square)

Step 6: Conduct Inferential Statistical Analysis

After calculating descriptive statistics, inferential
statistical analysis can be conducted. Crude and
multivariable logistic regression models can be calculated
to determine associations between e mail PPC (using
computer, smart phone, or other electronic means to use
e mail or the internet to communicate with a doctor or
a doctorb^@^Ys office) and colon cancer screening. Crude
logistic regression models are used to determine the
156 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

association between the independent and dependent
variables without adjusting for other factors.
Multivariable logistic regression models are used to
determine associations between the independent and
dependent variables after adjusting for potential
covariates (e.g. age, sex). A reference category for the
independent variables is needed. For this analysis, the
reference group is b^@^\No.b^@^] Results compare adults did and
did not use a computer, smart phone, or other electronic
means to use e mail or the internet to communicate with
their doctor or doctorb^@^Ys office. A sample SAS program
for conducting logistic regression analysis using HINTS
5 Cycle 3 data for this case study is provided in Box 8.5.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 157

Box 8.5. Sample SAS program for running HINTS inferential
statistics (logistic regression)

8.7 SUMMARY
This chapter provided an overview of the HINTS and
ways to conduct basic statistical analysis using HINTS
5 Cycle 3 public use data files. The HINTS case study
explored whether adults who used e mail to
communicate with their health care provider were more
158 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

or less likely to receive a colon cancer screening. Sample
SAS programming statements were provided for
downloading data files, labeling and formatting data files,
recoding and renaming variables, and conducting
categorical descriptive and inferential statistical analysis.
The dataset and full SAS programming statements for the
HINTS case study are available in the chapter 8 folder in
the Open ICPSR data repository.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 161

CHAPTER 9.

BEHAVIORAL RISK FACTOR SURVEILLANCE
SYSTEM

9.1 INTRODUCTION
Chapter 9 covers the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System (BRFSS). The BRFSS has been conducted by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) since
1984 to collect data on health behaviors, physical activity,
diet, hypertension and preventive safety measures (e.g.
seat belt use) among US adults.1This chapter includes
details on: how data are collected; how data are made
publicly available as machine actionable data files; what
variables must be included to address design features of
the complex sample; the strengths and limitations of the
survey; and practical tips for conducting statistical
analysis; and how to answer research questions using a
case study. The practical tips provided for analysis of
BRFSS data are based on the primary authorb^@^Ys previous
experiences analyzing 2014 and 2019 BRFSS data to
answer questions related to associations between
predisposing and enabling factors that contribute to
morbidity, mortality and health services use. The BRFSS
162 BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY

case study will explore how differences in caregiving
experiences among urban and rural adults in Texas are
moderated by race and ethnicity. The bulk of this chapter
will comprise of section 9.6: Case Study in order to give
investigators hands on practice downloading and
cleaning large databases and conducting basic categorical
data analysis using PROC SURVEYFREQ and PROC
SURVEYLOGISTIC. The syntax provided was created
for use with SAS 9.4.
9.2 DATA COLLECTION
Since beginning in 1984, the BRFSS was expanded in
1988 to include optional modules, including chronic
disease, health care access, and preventive services
uptake. Some optional modules include data collection
among children.1 In 1993, the BRFSS was further
expanded to become an annual national surveillance
system. The BRFSS uses a random digit dialing crosssectional study design to collect data using a computerassisted telephone interview (CATI) system. The BRFSS
is one of the largest health surveys collected worldwide
with over 400,000 responses collected each year.2 Prior to
2008, data were only collected from landline telephones.
In 2008, the methodology was revised to conduct
interviews using cell phones. Response rates are
calculated for landline, cell phone, and combined
responses for each state. National response rates are
calculated as a median of response rates from each state.
In 2019, the overall national combined response rate was
49.4% (range from (37.3% 73.1%).3 Response rates were
lowest in New York (39.5% landline, 33.5% cell phone,
37.3% overall) and highest in South Dakota (78.0%
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 163

landline, 33.5% cell phone, 73.1% overall). For Texas, the
landline response rate was 50.6%, the cell phone response
rate was 37.6%, and the combined response rate was
46.3%.3 Further details of the BRFSS sampling design
and data collection methods are reported on the BRFSS
website.4
9.3 DATA FILES
The CDC provides a complete BRFSS public use data
file available annually, which can be combined with other
years to increase sample sizes for the analysis of specific
subgroups. The annual questionnaire includes three
parts: 1) core component; 2) optional BRFSS modules;
and 3) state added questions.5 In 2019, BRFSS grouped
data into four datasets that combine landline and cellular
responses. The main 2019 BRFSS Questionnaire data file
can be used for research questions in the core section or
common modules asked by the states. Separate BRFSS
versions may be needed if states collected multiple
versions of the questionnaires.6
9.3.1 CORE COMPONENT
The core component includes a standard set of questions
used by all states. There is an annual core set of questions
are asked every year and rotating core set of questions
administered in odd  and even numbered years. The core
questions are selected from other established national
surveys, including the National Health Interview Survey
(NHIS) and National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) to allow for comparisons across
survey methods.5 Question topics include demographics,
health related perceptions, health conditions and health
164 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

behaviors. Examples include questions examining health
care access, health status, fruit and vegetable
consumption, alcohol, and tobacco use.5 Based on an
agreement between state representatives and the CDC,
states are required to administer the core component
each year without modification.
9.3.2 OPTIONAL MODULES
Additional modules on specific topics are created each
year. States vote to approve and adopt questions
proposed by the CDC for inclusion in the optional
modules. Then, states have the option to elect whether
or not to use these questions with the core component
on their annual survey.5 Examples include questions on
diabetes, skin cancer risk, shingles, cancer survivorship
and the caregiving module used for the case study
outlined in this chapter. Additional details on the optional
modules are available on the BRFSS website.
9.3.3. STATE ADDED QUESTIONS
States can also develop or obtain additional questions
to be added to their BRFSS questionnaires for state
programming purposes. In 2020, the Texas BRFSS added
nine sections with state added questions focused on 1)
health access; 2) e cigarette use; 3) reasons for not getting
a shingles vaccine; 4) cancer survivorship; 5) food
security; 6) oral health; 7) tobacco; 8) marijuana vaping;
and 9) suicide attempts.6 State added questions are not
available in the public use data files and must be obtained
directly from the state BRFSS coordinators. More details
on state added questions for each state are available on
each state specific BRFSS website.
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 165

9.4. STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS
A strength of the BRFSS is a large sample size in
comparison to other national datasets (e.g. NHIS or
NHANES) due to the telephone data collection design.
Another strengths is the ability for prevalence estimates
for cancer screening and other health behaviors to be
directly linked Healthy People 2020 and Healthy People
2030 objectives.5,7 A limitation of the BRFSS is that all
data are self reported. The interviews are not conducted
in person. There is an underrepresentation of rural
counties in the sample design. The optional core modules
are not administered by all US states and territories,
which make it difficult to make comparisons between
geographic contexts for those specific topics.5
9.5 DESIGN FEATURES
Data analysts must use special procedures to account for
the complex sample design used by the BRFSS. Analytic
procedures must include variables to adjust for the
clustering, stratification, and weighting of each data file.
The clustering ( PSU) and stratification ( STSTR) are the
same regardless of the data file used. An overview of the
BRFSS clustering, stratification, and weighting variables
for 2019 are provided in Table 9.1.

166 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

TABLE 9.1. OVERVIEW OF BRFSS COMPLEX
SAMPLE DESIGN VARIABLES
Data Description (Dataset)

Clustering Stratification

Weight

2019 BRFSS Questionnaire
Data (LLCP2019)

 PSU

 STSTR

 LLCPWT

2019 Combined Landline and
Cell Phone Version 1
(LLCP18V1)

 PSU

 STSTR

LCPWTV1

2019 Combined Landline and
Cell Phone Version 2
(LLCP18V2)

 PSU

 STSTR

LCPWTV2

2019 Combined Landline and
Cell Phone Version 3
(LLCP18V3)

 PSU

 STSTR

LCPWTV3

When combining multiple years of NHIS data,
investigators must divide the total annual weight by the
total number of years (or multiply by 1 total years) in the
merge prior to conducting their statistical analysis. For
example, if combining the full questionnaire data from
2015 2019,  LLCPWT should be divided by 5 or
multiplied by 1 5. An example of how to do this in SAS
9.4 is provided in Box 9.1.
Box 9.1. SAS program to create new weight variable for five
BRFSS data collection periods

9.6 BRFSS CASE STUDY: CAREGIVING
EXPERIENCES BY METRO AND NON METRO
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 167

GEOGRAPHIC CONTEXT AND RACE ETHNICITY
In 2020, the National Alliance for Caregiving (NAC) and
American Association of Retired Persons (AARP)
estimated that 21% of adults in the US are informal
caregivers, which has increased by 9.5 million since
2015.9 Over 11 million unpaid individuals, family or
friends, are caregivers for persons living with Alzheimerb^@^Ys
disease and related dementias (ADRD). The prevalence of
ADRD is highest among non Hispanic Whites; however,
the prevalence is increasing among racial and ethnically
diverse older adults. Few studies have evaluated
differences in ADRD caregiving by geographic context.
Studies which have compared ADRD caregiving in metro
and non metro areas have highlighted unmet resource
needs and support the lack of dementia specific10 and
respite services.11 In a recent study using data from
National Study of Caregiving (NSOC), Kindratt and
colleagues found that non metro ADRD caregivers were
less racially ethnically diverse (82.7% White), and more
were spouses partners (20.2%).12 Among racial ethnic
minority ADRD caregivers, non metro context was
associated with having more chronic conditions (p<.01),
providing less care (p<.01), and not co residing with care
recipients (p<.001). Among White ADRD caregivers, nonmetro context was associated with not reporting
caregiving was more than they could handle (p<.05) and
finding financial assistance for caregiving (p<.05). Nonmetro minority ADRD caregivers had 3.09 times higher
odds (95% CI=1.02 9.36) of reporting anxiety in
comparison to metro minority ADRD caregivers. The
BRFSS case study will extend this previous research by
using BRFSS data from Texas to examine differences in
168 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

ADRD caregiving experiences. Caregiving experiences
that will be evaluated include managing personal care
(e.g. medications, feeding, dressing, bathing) and the
household (e.g. cleaning, managing money, preparing
meals).
9.6.1 SPECIFIC AIMS
b^@" Aim 9.1. Determine whether ADRD caregiving
experiences differ across metro and non metro
geographic contexts among adults in Texas
b^@" Aim 9.2. Determine whether the relationship
between geographic context and ADRD
caregiving experiences is moderated by the
caregiverb^@^Ys race ethnicity among metro and nonmetro adults in Texas
9.6.2 METHODS
Complete the following steps to download, clean, recode
and analyze 2019 BRFSS data to determine how
associations between metro and non metro geographic
context and ADRD caregiver experiences are moderated
by race and ethnicity. The full SAS programs are available
for download in the chapter 9 folder in the Open ICPSR
data repository.
Step 1: Download BRFSS 2019 data and SAS programming files

b^@" Go to the 2019 BRFSS data website
b^@" Click on b^@^\2019 BRFSS Data (ASCII)b^@^] under data
files. This file contains the combined landline and
cell phone data
b^@" A zip file with a b^@^\.datb^@^] data file will be downloaded
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 169

to the b^@^\Downloadsb^@^] folder on your computer
b^@" Unzip the file and save the data file to your
computer. I recommend creating a folder on the
b^@^\C Driveb^@^] labeled BRFSS and separated by each
year. This will be consistent with the location
statements used in the textbook examples
b^@" Under SAS resources, there are three syntax files
that are useful for creating the dataset, formatting
and labeling the variables in the data file
b^W& Click on b^@^\SASOUT19 LLCP.SASb^@^] for the
programming statements used to convert
the b^@^\.datb^@^] data file into a SAS data file and
save to your computer. SAS statements
from this file will be run first during Step 2.
b^W& Click on and save b^@^\Formats19 [SAS7BCAT
Direct Download b^@^S 493 KB]b^@^] for
programming statements used to generate
the 2019 format library. Statements are
available for 32 bit and 64 bit SAS. SAS
statements from this file should be run
second during Step 2.
b^W& Click on and save b^@^\Formas19.sas CDCb^@^] for
format assignment statements. SAS
statements from this file will be run third
during Step 2.
Step 2: Run SAS programming statements to input data, create
library, formats and labels for 2019 BRFSS data

Sample SAS programming statements to create the
libraries and input the 2019 BRFSS data files are provided
170 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

in Box 9.2. To create these programming statements,
complete the following steps:
b^@" Open b^@^\SASOUT19 LLCP.SASb^@^] Programming File
b^@" Create a LIBNAME statement which houses the
data and files associated with the analysis. I
recommend creating the LIBNAME statement as
the survey name (e.g. b^@^\BRFSSb^@^]) and using the same
location that the data files for saved in on the C
drive (e.g. b^@^\C:\BRFSS\2019b^@^])
b^@" Create a FILENAME statement which lets SAS
know where the data file is stored (e.g. b^@^XC:\BRFSS\
2019\LLCP2019.ASCb^@^Y)
b^@" Modify or remove any instructions ( *green
text* ) that you do not need in programming file
b^@" Add filename to first DATA procedure (e.g. b^@^Xdata
brfss.sasdatab^@^Y)
b^@" Add libname to the INFILE procedure (e.g. b^@^Xbrfssb^@^Y)
b^@" Highlight all programming statements and click
RUN

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 171

Box 9.2. SAS Program to input 2019 BRFSS data file

Sample SAS programming statements to generate the
2019 format library are provided in Box 9.3. To create
these programming statements, complete the following
steps:
b^@" Open the b^@^\Formats19 [SAS7BCAT Direct
Download b^@^S 493 KB]b^@^] Programming File
b^@" Highlight all programming statements and click
RUN

172 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 6.3. SAS Program to generate BRFSS 2019 format library

Sample SAS programming statements to generate the
2019 BRFSS format assignment statements are provided
in Box 9.4. To create these programming statements,
complete the following steps:
b^@" Open the b^@^\Formas19.sas CDCb^@^] Programming File
b^@" Add b^@^\datab^@^] procedure statement at the top of the
file
b^@" Add b^@^\runb^@^] statement at the bottom of the file
b^@" Highlight all programming statements and click
RUN

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 173

Box 9.4. SAS Program to generate 2019 BRFSS format
assignment statements

Step 3: Limit the dataset to respondents from Texas

Due to the large sample size and state based probability
sampling frame, analysts can be confident that their
power will be sufficient for producing statewide
estimates. In this case study, our sample is limited to
respondents from Texas. The sample is also limited to
ADRD caregivers. To produce statistical estimates for the
state of Texas only, our data must be limited to response
option b^@^\48b^@^] for variable b^@^\ state.b^@^] Sample SAS
programming statements for limiting the dataset by state
are provided in Box 9.5.

174 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 9.5. SAS Program to limit 2019 BRFSS data to only Texas
respondents and ADRD caregivers

Step 4: Select variables for analysis

Once formats been assigned to the dataset, you can
remove any variables that are not needed for your
analysis. This will reduce the size of the dataset and make
processing time quicker when running SAS
programming statements. In this case study, I have kept
the following variables (Table 9.2) to denote the survey
design features and creation of the independent variable,
dependent variable, moderator, and selected covariates.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 175

Table 9.2 Overview of variables used for BRFSS case study
Variable Name

Variable Description
Design Variables

 PSU

Primary Sampling Unit

 STSTR

Sample Design Stratification

 LLCPWT

Weight: Land line and cell
Inclusion Criteria

 STATE

State code

CAREGIV1

Provided regular care: family friend

CRGVALZD

Care recipient has Alzheimerb^@^Ys disease,
dementia, or other cognitive impairment
Independent Variables

 METSTAT

Metropolitan status
Dependent Variables

CRGVHRS1

Hours provide care

CRGVPER1

Managed personal care

CRGVHOU1

Managed household tasks
Moderator

IMPRACE

Imputed race ethnicity value
Covariates

CRGVREL3

Relationship to care recipient

 AGE G

Imputed age in six groups

SEXVAR

Sex of respondent

EMPLOY1

Employment status

Step 5: Recode and rename variables

Questionnaire responses often need to be recoded or
responses collapsed prior to conducting statistical
176 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

analysis. For example, the BRFSS has response options
b^@^\7=Donb^@^Yt Knowb^@^] and b^@^\9=Refusedb^@^] for several questions.
The responses are often removed and made b^@^\missingb^@^]
prior to analysis. Furthermore, the numbers that
represent certain values may need to be changed for
easier interpretation of statistical analysis results. For
example, BRFSS has response options b^@^\1=Yesb^@^] and
b^@^\2=No.b^@^] It is common practice to change b^@^\nob^@^] responses
to 0, b^@^\0=No.b^@^] It is best practice to rename these recoded
variables with a new variable name instead of replacing
the original variable.
An overview of the variables recoded and renamed for
analysis in this case study is provided in Table 9.3.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 177

Table 9.3. Overview of BRFSS variables recoded and renamed to
meet research aims
Question
Description
Care
recipient has
ADRD

Hours
provided
care in
average
week

Original
Variable

Renamed
Variable

Recoded
Responses

CRGVALZD

1=Yes
2=No
7=Donb^@^Yt
CR ADRD
know
9=Refused

CRGVHRS1

1=Up to 8
hours
2=9 19
1=0 19
hours
hours
3=20 39
2=20 39
hours
CG HOURS hours
4=40
3=40
hours or
hours or
more
more
7=Donb^@^Yt
know
9=Refused

Managed
personal
care
(medications, CRGVPER1
feeding,
dressing,
bathing)
Managed
household
(cleaning,
managing
money,
preparing
meals)

Original
Responses

1=Yes;
2=No
7=Donb^@^Yt
CG PCA
know
9=Refused

0=No
1=Yes

0=No
1=Yes

1=Yes;
2=No
0=No
CRGVHOU1 7=Donb^@^Yt
CG HOUSE
1=Yes
know
9=Refused

178 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Table 9.3 (continued). Overview of BRFSS variables recoded and
renamed to meet research aims
Question
Description

Original
Variable

Original
Responses

Renamed
Variable

Recoded
Responses

Relation of
care
recipient to
caregiver

1=Mother
2=Father
3=Mother in law
4=Father in law
5=Child
6=Husband
7=Wife
8=Live in partner
0=Other
9=Brother or
CRGVREL3
CG RELATION 1=Spouse or
brother in law
partner
10=Sister or
sister in law
11=Grandmother
12=Grandfather
13=Grandchild
14=Other
relative
15=Non relative

Caregiver
Sex

SEXVAR

Employment EMPLOY1

1=Male
2=Female

CG SEX
(rename only)

1=Male
2=Female

1=Employed for
wages
2=Self employed
3=Out of work
1+ year
4=Out of work
<1 year
5=Homemaker
6=Student
7=Retired
8=Unable to
work
9=Refused

CG WORK

1=Employed
2=Retired
3=Not
working

A sample SAS program for recoding and renaming 2019
BRFSS data for this case study is provided in Box 9.6.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 179

Box 9.6. Sample SAS program for recoding and renaming BRFSS
variables

Step 6: Conduct descriptive statistical analysis

Once all variables are recoded, collapsed, and renamed
they can be used for statistical analysis. Statistical analysis
should always start with descriptive analysis to describe
the data source. Chi square analyses should be conducted
to make categorical comparisons between the
independent variable, covariates, and dependent
variables. It is important to remember that all analysis
of BRFSS data needs to be conducted with SAS Survey
procedures due to the complex sample design. Weighting
180 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

(variable:  LLCPWT), primary sampling unit (variable:
 PSU) and cluster (variable:  STSTR) variables must be
included in the programming statements.
A sample SAS program for conducting chi square tests
using 2019 BRFSS data for this case study is provided in
Box 9.7.
Box 9.7. Sample SAS program for running descriptive statistics
(chi square)

Step 7: Conduct inferential statistical analysis

After calculating descriptive statistics, inferential
statistical analysis can be conducted. Crude and
multivariable logistic regression models can be calculated
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 181

to determine associations between metropolitan or nonmetropolitan residential context and caregiver
experiences. Crude logistic regression models are used to
determine the association between the independent and
dependent variables without adjusting for other factors.
Multivariable logistic regression models are used to
determine associations between the independent and
dependent variables after adjusting for potential
covariates (e.g. sex, employment status). A reference
category for the independent variables are needed. For
this analysis, the reference group is b^@^\Metropolitanb^@^]
residence. Results compare caregiving experiences
among caregivers who live in metropolitan (urban) and
non metropolitan (rural) geographic contexts.
A sample SAS program for conducting logistic
regression analysis using 2019 BRFSS data for this case
study is provided in Box 9.8.

182 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Box 9.8. Sample SAS program for running BRFSS inferential
statistics (logistic regression)

In order to determine whether race ethnicity is a
moderator in the relation between geographic context
and ADRD caregiver experiences, a b^@^\DOMAINb^@^]
statement in SAS must be used to present stratified
results. Any example of where to include this statement is
provided in Box 9.9. The  IMPRACE variable may need
to be recoded to b^@^\White Non Hispanicb^@^] and b^@^\Other 
Minorityb^@^] due to small sample sizes of non metro ADRD
minority caregivers separated by specific races and
ethnicities.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 183

Box 9.9. Sample SAS program for running BRFSS inferential
statistics (logistic regression) using DOMAIN statement to
stratify results

9.7 SUMMARY
This chapter provided an overview of the BRFSS and
ways to conduct basic statistical analysis for one state
using 2019 BRFSS public use data files. The BRFSS case
study explored whether geographic context was
associated with caregiving experiences. Sample SAS
programming
statements
were
provided
for
downloading and inputting data files, merging data files,
recoding and renaming variables, and conducting
categorical descriptive and inferential statistical analysis.
The dataset and full SAS programming statements for the
BRFSS case study are available in the chapter 9 folder in
the Open ICPSR data repository.

184 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT


BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 187

CHAPTER 10.

NATIONAL HEALTH AND NUTRITION
EXAMINATION SURVEY

10.1 INTRODUCTION
Chapter 10 covers the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES). The NHANES has been
collected by the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS) since 1960 to monitor and explore trends in the
health status and nutritional status among all individuals
in the United States (US).1 It became formally known as
the NHANES in 1999. A unique aspect of the NHANES
in comparison to other surveys is that the NHANES
collects data from both subjective interviews and
objective physical examinations and laboratory tests.
Objective measures are collected at mobile examination
centers.1 This chapter includes details on: how data are
collected; how data are made publicly available as
machine actionable data files; what variables must be
included to address design features of the complex
sample; the strengths and limitations of the survey; and
practical tips for conducting statistical analysis; and how
to answer research questions using a case study. The
188 BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY

practical tips provided for analysis of NHANES data are
based on the authorb^@^Ys previous experiences analyzing
NHANES data to answer questions related to
associations between predisposing and enabling factors
that contribute to health behaviors, morbidity, mortality
and health services use. The NHANES case study will
explore racial and ethnic differences in 24 hour
movement guideline adherence, specifically sedentary
behavior guideline adherence. This objective is part of
a series of research questions designed to evaluate how
physical activity, sleep, and sedentary behavior are
associated with cognitive health outcomes among adults
in the US. The bulk of the chapter will comprise of
section 10.6: NHANES Case Study in order to give the
readers hands on practice downloading and cleaning
large databases and conducting basic categorical data
analysis using PROC SURVEYFREQ and PROC
SURVEYLOGISTIC. The syntax provided was created
for use with SAS 9.4 .
10.2 DATA COLLECTION
The NHANES uses a cross sectional study design to
collect data from personal interviews, physical
examinations
and
laboratory
data
among
non institutionalized adults and children. Data are
compiled and released in 2 year cycles as public use data
files.2 From 2011 2014, the complex sample design
included 13 major strata, 4 minor strata and 8 primary
sampling units (PSU).2 The study design oversampled
Hispanics, non Hispanic Blacks and non Hispanic
Asians, persons below 130% of federal poverty level and
persons ages 80 years and older. Data were collected from
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 189

five US regions, with California separated as a distinct
group. Starting in 2015, the design changed to 14 major
strata, 4 minor strata and 4 PSUs.3 Individuals were
oversampled below 185% federal poverty level instead of
130% and California was not separated from all other
states in the new design.
10.3 DATA FILES
The most recent NHANES iterations (2017 2020)
included demographic, dietary, medical examination,
laboratory, questionnaire, and limited access data.4 Data
were collected in participantsb^@^Y households as well as
mobile examination centers.
10.3.1 Demographic Data

The demographic data file includes individual details on
the participantsb^@^Y gender, age, marital status, language
preference, race, and ethnicity.4 Questions on place of
birth are included and participants who report that they
do not live in the US are asked about their citizenship
status and how long they have lived in the US. While the
NHANES collected data on countries of birth outside of
the US, details on the countries of birth are not available
to the public. The demographic data file also includes
questions related to socioeconomic status, including the
highest level of education, income, and questions about
military service. Pregnancy status is reported among
women ages 20 to 44 years. Primary sampling unit,
cluster, and weighting variables are located with the
demographic data for the 2017 2020 pre pandemic data
files.4,5

190 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

10.3.2 Dietary Data

The NHANES dietary interviews are conducted to
obtain dietary data on food and beverage intake 24 hours
prior to the first interview.6 The dietary interviews are
conducted in person at mobile examination centers with
follow up phone calls. For participants less than six years
old, dietary data are collected from a proxy adult. For
children 6 8 and 9 11 years old, interviews are conducted
with the child and a proxy adult. Child participants ages
12 and older completed interviews themselves. In person
interviews include several household items to be used
for measuring food intake amounts. Participants were
provided with these items to take home for the telephone
interviews collected 3 to 10 days later.6 There are several
data files that include variables from the dietary
interviews. NHANES provides data files for first  and
second day individual foods and nutrients. There are also
data files that include information on 24 hour and
30 day dietary supplements.6 The individual food data
files include comprehensive responses on the types of
food combinations eaten (e.g. cereal, soup, salad, tortilla
products), its source (e.g. store b^@^S grocery supermarket,
restaurant with waiter waitress, in K 12 school, or
childcare center), and nutrients (e.g. total folic acid [mcg],
potassium [mg], energy [kcal]).6
10.3.3. Examination Data

The NHANES examination files comprise of data from
multiple procedures to measure the health of
participants.7 All examinations are conducted in the
mobile examination centers. Examples of the
examinations conducted include measurements of
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 191

audiometry, anthropometry, body measures, balance,
blood pressure, cardiovascular fitness, dermatology,
muscle strength and oral health among others.7
10.3.4 Laboratory Data

The NHANES laboratory files comprise of multiple tests
conducted on the biological specimens of participants.8
All laboratory data are collected in the mobile
examination centers and sent to a laboratory for testing.
Laboratory tests are conducted using blood, urine and
other biospecimens (e.g., hair, nasal swab, plasma).8
Examples of laboratory tests conducted include
cholesterol, folate, glycohemoglobin, insulin, plasma
fasting glucose, and mercury, among others.8
10.3.5 Questionnaire Data

The NHANES laboratory files include self reported data
on questions regarding the health and wellness of
participants.9 Questionnaire data are collected in the
household, mobile examination centers, and by
telephone. Examples of questionnaire data collected
range from socioeconomic status (occupation, income),
acculturation, weight history, preventive health behaviors
(e.g., immunizations, smoking, physical activity), health
conditions
(e.g.,
diabetes,
kidney
conditions,
osteoporosis), food security and health care access and
utilization.9
10.3.6 Limited Access Data

The NHANES limited access data files measure sensitive
topics among youth and adults.10 Data from
questionnaires as well as biospecimens are collected with
192 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

special precautions put in place so ensure confidentiality.
Examples of limited access data include biospecimens
collected to measure lead in blood and sexually
transmitted diseases (e.g., chlamydia, herpes simplex
viruses, HIV antibodies) and questionnaire data on drug
use, alcohol use, and sexual behaviors among youth and
adults.10 Limited access data files are not available for
public use. Researchers must apply for access through
the National Center for Health Statisticsb^@^Y Research Data
Centers.10
10.3.7 Linked Data

The NHANES can be linked to National Death Index
(NDI) and Medicare data.11 Efforts are underway to link
NHANES data with Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) and Medicaid data.11 The purpose of linking
NHANES and NDI data is to examine how multiple risk
factors related to health and nutrition are associated with
mortality. Linked NHANES NDI data can be accessed
as public use data files or through a restricted data
application. Public use linked data files are only provided
for adults and do not provide specific dates for birth,
interviews and death, or specific causes of death beyond
standard categories. Linkages with Medicare data allow
for research focused on health status, health care costs,
health care utilization, and prescription drug use among
Medicare enrollees.11 To access more specific details of
the linked data, researchers must apply for access through
the National Center for Health Statisticsb^@^Y Research Data
Centers.11

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 193

10.3.8 Restricted Data

The NHANES restricts data on geography (Census 2010
Block ID), genetics (e.g. BRCA1 associated protein), and
the exact dates of participantsb^@^Y interviews and
examinations. To used these data, researchers must apply
for access through the National Center for Health
Statisticsb^@^Y Research Data Centers.12
10.4. STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS
There are several advantages to using the NHANES for
research. First, the ability to validate self reported and
objective measurements through personal interviews,
and physical examinations is a strength. A second
strength is the ability to determine undiagnosed diseases
with laboratory values, such as diabetes mellitus. A third
strength is the ability to use acculturation variables
collected among Hispanic and non Hispanic Asian
participants. However, there are some limitations of
using NHANES data. First, there is a smaller annual
sample size compared to other national surveys such as
the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). Second,
the place of birth questions are limited to US  or foreignborn only and no data is collected on country of birth,
which limits the ability for data disaggregation among
foreign born groups. Third, the large number of
subsection files requires multiple merges of data files for
each survey year.
10.5 DESIGN FEATURES
Data analysts must use special procedures to account for
the complex sample design used by the NHANES. Survey
194 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

procedures much include variables to adjust for the
primary sampling units, stratification, and weighting of
each cycle of continuous data files. Changes were made
to the complex design variables for the 2017 2020 prepandemic data files because there were two cycles
(2017 2018 and 2019 2020) and the 2019 2020 data file
was incomplete.5 For 2017 2020, the complex sample
design variables are available in the b^@^\Demographic
Variables and Sample Weightb^@^] file. Researchers must
decide which weight to use based on the aims of their
study using NHANES data. For research studies that only
use data from the interviews, the interview weight is most
appropriate. For research studies that use outcomes from
the examination or laboratory data files, the mobile
examination center weight is most appropriate. An
overview of the primary sampling unit, stratum, and
weighting variables for the 2017 2020 pre pandemic data
files are provided in Table 10.1.
Table 10.1. Overview of complex sample design variables for
NHANES 2017 2020 pre pandemic cycle
Weights
Primary
Sampling Unit

Stratum

SDMVPSU

SDMVSTRA

Interview

Mobile
Examination
Center

WTINTPRP

WTMECPRP

10.6 NHANES CASE STUDY
In 2018, the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology
convened to develop the Canadian 24 Hour Movement
Guidelines for adults ages 18 64 years and ages 65 and
older. The guidelines integrate recommendations for
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 195

sleep, physical activity, and sedentary behavior with the
rationale that the combination of these behaviors
throughout the day is associated with improved health
outcomes.13 Among adults ages 18 64 years old, it is
recommended that individuals get 7 to 9 hours of goodquality sleep on a regular basis, with consistent bed and
wake up times. Adults are recommended to perform a
variety of intensities and types of physical activity,
including: 1) moderate to vigorous aerobic physical
activities such that there is an accumulation of at least
150 minutes per week; 2) muscle strengthening activities
using major muscle groups at least twice a week; and
3) several hours of light physical activities, including
standing.13 It is recommended that adults limit sedentary
behavior to 8 hours or less (~480 minutes), including no
more than 3 hours of recreational screen time and
breaking up long periods of sitting as often as possible.13
Recommendations differ slightly among older adults.
Among adults ages 65 and older, it is recommended that
individuals get 7 to 8 hours of good quality sleep on a
regular basis, with consistent bed and wake up times. In
addition to the physical activity recommendations for
adults ages 18 65 years, older adults are recommended
to engage in physical activities that challenge balance.13
There are no differences in recommendations for
sedentary behavior among adults ages 18 64 years or 65
years and older. While exercise physiology and health
organizations in the US set goals and standards for each
of these health behaviors, there is no effort for integration
of these movements to examine health disparities. In this
case study, we will determine racial and ethnic
differences in sedentary behavior among US  and
foreign born Hispanics, non Hispanic Whites, non196 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Hispanic Blacks, and non Hispanic Asians. Future
research will incorporate physical activity and sleep
behaviors.
10.6.1 SPECIFIC AIMS
b^@" Aim 10.1: Compare the prevalence of adherence
to 24 hour sedentary behavior guidelines in US
adults by race, ethnicity, and nativity status
b^@" Aim 10.2: Determine associations between race,
ethnicity, and nativity and sedentary guideline
adherence among racially and ethnically diverse
foreign born adults compared to their US born
counterparts
10.6.2 METHODS
Complete the following steps to download, clean, recode
and analyze NHANES data to answer the specific aims.
Step 1: Download demographics, questionnaire, and examination
datasets

Follow the steps below to download and store the
necessary data files for the NHANES case study and
import them into SAS 9.4.
b^@" Create a folder in a permanent location to save
your data files. I recommend creating a folder on
the b^@^\C Driveb^@^] titled NHANES with a subfolder to
identify the years (2017 2020). This will align
with the examples in this textbook.
b^@" Go to the NHANES 2017  March 2020 prepandemic data website
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 197

b^W& Under b^@^\Data, Documentation, Codebooks,b^@^]
click b^@^\Demographics Data.b^@^]
b^W& Click on b^@^\P DEMO Data [XPT b^@^S 3.4 MB]b^@^]
under b^@^\Data File.b^@^] This file should
automatically be downloaded and show up
at the bottom of the browser or your
b^@^\Downloadsb^@^] folder. The file is a b^@^\SAS
Xport Transport Fileb^@^] type. This data file
can be opened in SAS and saved as a
standard SAS file.
b^@" Go back to the NHANES 2017  March 2020 prepandemic data website
b^W& Under b^@^\Data, Documentation, Codebooks,b^@^]
click b^@^\Questionnaire Data.b^@^]
b^W& In the row for Physical Activity, click on
b^@^\P PAQ Data [XPT b^@^S 1.3 MB]b^@^] under b^@^\Data
File.b^@^] This file should automatically be
downloaded and show up at the bottom of
the browser or your b^@^\Downloadsb^@^] folder.
The file is a b^@^\SAS Xport Transport Fileb^@^]
type. This data file can be opened in SAS
and saved as a standard SAS file
b^@" Go back to the NHANES 2017  March 2020 prepandemic data website
b^W& Under b^@^\Data, Documentation, Codebooks,b^@^]
click b^@^\Examination Data.b^@^]
b^W& In the row for Body Measures, click on
b^@^\P BMX Data [XPT b^@^S 2.4 MB]b^@^] under
b^@^\Data File.b^@^] This file should automatically
be downloaded and show up at the bottom
198 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

of the browser or your b^@^\Downloadsb^@^] folder.
The file is a b^@^\SAS Xport Transport Fileb^@^]
type. This data file can be opened in SAS
and saved as a standard SAS file.
Step 2: Open SAS transport files in SAS and save to permanent
datasets for merge

Double click to open each of the SAS Xport transport files
downloaded and saved on the C Drive in SAS.
b^@" There should be three temporary work files
created once these files are opened. The file names
should be:
b^W& P BMX
b^W& P DEMO
b^W& P PAQ
b^@" Open a new SAS syntax editor file by clicking
b^@^\Newb^@^] where the blank white page is located.
b^@" Enter the syntax to merge the data files provided
in Box 10.1. The variable used to identify each
participant is SEQN.
Box 10.1. Sample SAS program to merge 2017 2020
Pre Pandemic NHANES data files

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 199

Step 3: Keep only the variables that you need

Once the data files are merged, it is recommended to
keep only the variables needed for the analysis. Removing
additional variables will allow the SAS program to run
and present results faster. In this case study, I have kept
the following variables (Table 10.2) to denote the survey
design features and creation of the independent variables,
dependent variables, and selected covariates.
Table 10.2. Overview of variables used for NHANES case study
Original File

Variable Name

Variable Description

Design Variables
All Files

SEQN

Respondent sequence
number

P DEMO

WTINTPRP

Full sample interview
weight

P DEMO

SDMVPSU

Masked variance
pseudo PSU

P DEMO

SDMVSTRA

Masked variance
pseudo stratum

Independent Variables
P DEMO

RIDRETH3

Race Hispanic origin
w  NH Asian

P DEMO

DMDBORN4

Country of birth

Dependent Variable
P PAQ

PAD680

Minutes sedentary
activity

Covariates
P DEMO

RIDAGEYR

Age in years at
screening

P DEMO

RIAGENDR

Gender

P BMX

BMXBMI

Body Mass Index (kg 
m^2)

200 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

A sample SAS program with a keep statement that
includes only the variables needed is provided in Box
10.2.

Box 10.2. Sample SAS program to keep only variables needed for
case study

Step 4: Recode and rename variables

Questionnaire and examination responses often need to
be recoded or responses collapsed prior to conducting
statistical analysis. For example, the NHANES has
response options b^@^\7777=Refusedb^@^] and b^@^\9999=Donb^@^Yt
knowb^@^] for several questions. These responses are often
removed and made b^@^\missingb^@^] prior to analysis.
Furthermore, the numbers that represent certain values
may need to be changed for easier interpretation of
statistical analysis results. For example, NHANES has
response options b^@^\1=Yesb^@^] and b^@^\2=No.b^@^] It is common
practice to change b^@^\nob^@^] responses to 0, b^@^\0=No.b^@^] It is best
practice to rename these recoded variables with a new
variable name instead of replacing the original variable.
Two or more variables may need to be combined in order
to create the independent, dependent or other variables
to answer study aims. In this case study, we will examine
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 201

racial and ethnic differences in sedentary behavior by
nativity status. Therefore, we will combine two variables
for 1) race and ethnicity and 2) country of birth. An
overview of the variables recoded and renamed for
analysis in this case study is provided in Table 10.3.

202 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Table 10.3 Overview of NHANES variables and recodes
Variable
Description

Original
Variable

Original
Responses

Race 
Hispanic
origin w 
RIDRETH3
non Hispanic
(NH) Asian

1=Mexican
American
2=Other
Hispanic
3=NH White
4=NH Black
5=None
6=NH Asian
7=Other,
Multiple

Country of
birth

1=Born in 50
US states DC
2=Others
DMDBORN4
77=Refused
99=Donb^@^Yt
know

Renamed
Variable

WHITE BORN

BLACK BORN

HISP BORN

1=US born
Hispanic
2=Foreign born
Hispanic

ASIAN BORN

1=US born
Asian
2=Foreign born
Asian
0=Not
adherent
(>=480
minutes)
1=Adherent
(<480 minutes)

AGE NEW

1=18 64 years
2=65+ years

BMI NEW

1=Healthy or
underweight
(BMI<=24.4)
2=Overweight
(BMI>=25 and
BMI<=29.9)
3=Obese
(BMI>=30)

Minutes
sedentary
behavior

PAD680

Age in years
at screening

RIDAGEYR

0 79=0 79
years
80=80+ years

BMXBMI

11.9 to
92.3=Range of
values

1=US born
White
2=Foreign born
White

1=US born
Black
2=Foreign born
Black

0 1320 Range
of values
7777=Refused SED GUIDE
9999 Donb^@^Yt
know

Body Mass
Index (kg 
m^2)

Recoded
Responses

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 203

A sample SAS program for recoding and renaming
NHANES data for this case study is provided in Box 10.3.
All recodes are available in the full syntax file provided on
the course website.
Box 10.3. Sample SAS program to recode and rename NHANES
variables

Step 5: Conduct Descriptive Statistical Analysis

Once all variables are recoded, collapsed, and renamed
they can be used for statistical analysis. Statistical analysis
204 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

should always start with descriptive analysis to describe
the data source. Chi square analyses should be conducted
to make comparisons between the independent variables,
covariates, and dependent variables. It is important to
remember that all analysis of NHANES data needs to
be conducted with SAS survey procedures due to the
complex sample design. Weighting (variable: WTINTPRP
for questionnaire data), primary sampling unit (variable:
SDMVPSU) and stratum (variable: SDMVSTRA)
variables must be included in the programming
statements.
A sample SAS program for conducting chi square tests
using 2017 2020 pre pandemic NHANES data for this
case study is provided in Box 10.4.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 205

Box 10.4. Sample SAS program for running descriptive statistics
(chi square)

Step 6: Conduct Inferential Statistical Analysis

After calculating descriptive statistics, inferential
statistical analysis can be conducted. Crude and
multivariable logistic regression models can be calculated
to determine associations between race, ethnicity,
nativity status and sedentary guideline adherence. Crude
or unadjusted logistic regression models are used to
determine the association between the independent and
dependent variables without adjusting for other factors.
Multivariable or adjusted logistic regression models are
206 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

used to determine associations between the independent
and dependent variables after adjusting for potential
covariates (e.g. age, gender, BMI). A reference category
for the independent variable in needed. For this analysis,
the reference group for each racial and ethnic group will
be those born in the US (e.g. US born non Hispanic
Whites, US born non Hispanic Blacks). A sample SAS
program for conducting logistic regression analysis using
2017 2020 pre pandemic NHANES data for this case
study is provided in Box 10.5.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 207

Box 10.5. Sample SAS program for running inferential statistics
(logistic regression)

10.7 SUMMARY
This chapter provided an overview of the NHANES and
ways to conduct basic statistical analysis using 2017 2020
pre pandemic public use data files. The NHANES case
study explored differences in sedentary guideline
adherence among US  and foreign born adults by race
208 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

and ethnicity. Sample SAS programming statements were
provided for downloading and inputting data files,
merging data files, recoding and renaming variables and
conducting categorical descriptive and inferential
statistical analysis. The dataset and full SAS programming
statements for the NHANES case study are available in
the chapter 10 folder in the Open ICPSR data repository.

212 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

CHAPTER 11.

DISSEMINATION

11.1 INTRODUCTION
The final step in the research process is to report your
findings.1 This chapter covers the dissemination of
research studies using secondary data from national
health surveys. It includes details on how to disseminate
results by abstracts, presentations, and original research
manuscripts. This chapter builds on previous curricula
designed to train medical students2 and physician
assistant students3 in research methods. The previous
curricula materials have been modified and enhanced for
researchers focused on disseminated results from
secondary data analysis.
11.2 ABSTRACTS
Abstracts are brief summaries (typically 150 350 words)
of preliminary findings or completed research projects.
Abstracts are included at the beginning of most research
manuscripts to inform the reader of the purpose,
methods, most important findings, and implications of
the research study. However, prior to being written to
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 213

accompany manuscripts, abstracts can be written and
submitted to professional organizations in calls for
presentations during scientific sessions at professional
meetings. Abstracts are usually structured like
manuscripts using the following four sections: 1)
introduction; 2) methods; 3) results; and 4) discussion
(IMRAD).4 The IMRAD structure aligns with the
processes of scientific discovery and health research. The
health research process includes identifying a study
question (introduction), selecting the study approach,
designing the study and collecting data (methods),
analyzing data (results), and reporting findings
(discussion).1 However, some abstracts are unstructured
without headings. Both formats include the same basic
information about the research study. For abstracts using
secondary data, it is important to include the source of
the data as well as the years of data analyzed. Abstract
guidelines for different professional meetings vary by
organization. These guidelines should be provided with
the call for abstracts shared on each professional
meetingb^@^Ys website. An overview of some guidelines for
public health research conferences that accept abstracts
for studies using secondary data from national health
surveys is provided in Table 11.1.

214 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

TABLE 11.1. SAMPLE ABSTRACT
REQUIREMENTS FOR PROFESSIONAL MEETINGS
ACCEPTING ABSTRACTS FOR RESEARCH USING
SECONDARY DATA FROM NATIONAL HEALTH
SURVEYS FOR PRESENTATIONS
Academy
Health

American
Public Health
Association

Gerontological
Society of
America

Word limit

500

250

250

Headings

Research
Objective
Study Design
Population
Studied
Principal
Findings
Conclusions
Implications for
Policy or
Practice

Background
Methods
Results
Conclusions

None

Additional
Requirements

None

At least 1
learning
objective

At least 1
learning
objective

*Note. This table has been adapted and updated from Table 11.1: Abstract
requirements for common professional meetings in Kindratt &
Kitzman Ulrichb^@^Ys (2014) chapter on dissemination in Gimpel & Mokuria
(eds.) Community Action Research in Family Medicine Residencies: A
Community Medicine Handbook.5

Abstracts accepted for conference presentation are
usually published on the organizationsb^@^Y website as part
of the program for the meeting. Some professional
organizations partner with journals to publish abstracts
is supplementary issues of their journals. For example,
the Gerontological Society of America publishes abstracts
from the previous year in a supplemental issue of
Innovation in Aging. Examples of both primary and
secondary research abstracts presented at professional
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 215

meetings and published in journals by this textbookb^@^Ys
primary author are provided in Table 11.2. Several
primary studies were led and disseminated by students
and residents.
Table 11.2. Examples of abstract publications6 9 after
presentation at professional meetings
Conference

Authors &
Year

Title

Journal

2021
Gerontological
Society of
Kindratt et
America
al., 20216
Annual
Scientific
Meeting

ADRD Caregiving
Experiences and
Health by Race,
Innovation in
Ethnicity and Care
Aging
Recipient Geographic
Context

2020
Academy
Health Annual
Research
Meeting

Cognitive disability
among Arab
Americans by
nativity status: lack
of evidence for the
healthy migrant
effect

Health
Services
Research

2019
Gerontological
Dallo &
Society of
Kindratt,
America
Annual
20198
Scientific
Meeting

The epidemiology of
Alzheimerb^@^Ys disease
and related
dementias among
Arab Americans.

Innovation in
Aging

2018 Food &
Nutrition
Conference &
Expo

Teaching mobile
health technology.

Journal of
the Academy
of Nutrition
and Dietetics

Kindratt et
al., 20207

Xiao et al.,
20189

216 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

11.3 PRESENTATIONS
Part of the scientific process is to disseminate research
by poster and oral presentation at professional scientific
meetings prior to publication in peer reviewed journals.
Poster presentations are often used for preliminary
findings and oral presentations highlight the results from
completed research studies. By presenting at professional
scientific meetings, researchers are able to obtain
feedback on their research methods and make changes as
needed. Researchers may also network and learn about
similar research studies being conducted that they may
not know about because the results have not been
published yet. A brief overview of poster and oral
presentations with examples are provided in this section.
Some details are also provided on the impact of the
COVID 19 pandemic on presentations at professional
scientific meetings.
11.3.1 POSTER PRESENTATIONS
Poster presentation sessions have been utilized at
professional meetings in the US since the 1970s.11 Poster
presentations are a useful way for students to present
their research findings in a way that is usually considered
to be less stressful than a formal oral presentation in front
of an audience. Poster presentations are often created
as one slide using Microsoft PowerPoint. Most posters
are large (3ft x 4ft) and landscape format. An example is
provided in Figure 11.1.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 217

Figure 11.1. Landscape poster example from 2021 Academy
Health Annual Research Meeting

It may be more common for conferences overseas to
have posters presented in a vertical format. An example
of a poster presentation from a conference in England is
provided in Figure 11.2.

218 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Figure 11.2. Vertical poster example from 2012 Association for
the Study of Medical Education (ASME) Conference in Brighton,
England

Some benefits of a poster presentation are that research
findings can reach a larger audience and it may be easier
to engage in a conversation and network with
professional contacts. Poster presentations also allow the
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 219

audience member to view multiple points of entry.10 The
audience member may view the title and go straight to
the results section before having to view the introduction
or methods of the presentation. An effective poster
presentation is a condensed version of a full research
abstract and may also be referred to as an illustrated
abstract.9 It should include all IMRAD sections as well
an acknowledgment of the funding source (if applicable)
and contact information for the principal investigator so
that the viewer may contact them after the presentation.
Additional tips on creating poster presentations include:
1. the less text the better
2. use a specific title related to the research aim (see
Figure 11.1), or title that tries to catch the
audienceb^@^Ys attention (see Figure 11.2)
3. use bright colors
4. use pictures to portray a specific intervention or
population of interest, particularly if conducting
primary research with students or community
members.
A photo release form is recommended if using pictures.
An example of a poster presentation with pictures of
physician assistant students and community member
participants is provided in Figure 11.3.

220 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Figure 11.3. Poster example using pictures of student and
community member participants

11.3.2 ORAL PRESENTATIONS
An oral or platform presentation allows the researcher
to practice sharing their research findings in a formal
presentation. Oral presentations at professional meetings
typically range from 10 20 minutes with 5 10 minutes
at the end designated for audience members to ask
questions. Oral presentations are usually created using
Microsoft PowerPoint slides or slides from a similar
program. Slides should emphasize key points to engage
with the audience. Similar to poster presentations, the
oral presentation should include a combination of
bulleted text, figures, tables and pictures. It is sometimes
recommended that researchers create a poster
presentation first and then transfer the information from
each section to a new set of slides for the oral
presentation. A good rule of thumb is to include 1 slide
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 221

per minute of each presentation. Slides should use basic
text and a large font of size 28 or larger for visual
accessibility. The presenter should use the slides as a
guide but not just read directly off each slide while
presenting. Animations and transition slides can be used;
however, they may be distracting and difficult for
individuals with seeing disabilities. Since the short
timeframe of oral presentations may not all allow the
investigator to include all of the details of the research
study, presenters may be interested in including some
supplemental slides at the end in case the audience asks
questions about any content that was not covered in the
presentation.10
11.3.3 VIRTUAL AND ONLINE PRESENTATIONS
In March 2020, stay at home orders and safety
precautions due to the COVID 19 pandemic forced most
professional meetings to be virtual using online
platforms, including social media (e.g. twitter
presentations), video conferencing (e.g. Zoom), and other
software systems.11 Some presentations were required to
be given live while others were pre recorded and posted
to YouTube or a meeting portal. There are several benefits
and limitations to hosting virtual conferences.12 Some
of the benefits include the ability to reach a wider
international audience and allow those who may not have
the funding or other ability to attend in person meetings
due to obligations at home. Some of the limitations
include technical issues while presenting, such as issues
with lighting, webcams, and inconsistent internet
access.12 While presenting in virtual panel sessions, at
least one or more of the presenters may have technical
222 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

difficulties. Virtual conferences may also limit the ability
of the presenter to fully engage in the presentation. For
example, the presenter may have children at home due
to school closures or have other work obligations that
they may not have been required to attend if they were at
an in person meeting. Virtual conference attendance may
allow some individuals greater comfort in networking
activities while others may be more comfortable
networking with their peers in person. Regardless of a
researcherb^@^Ys preference for in person, virtual, or hybrid
presentation formats, virtual poster and oral
presentations allow researchers to share their work in
additional accessible ways which will most likely
continue to be offered as a mode of dissemination beyond
the COVID 19 pandemic.11,12
11.4 MANUSCRIPTS
The final step in the research process is to write and
submit a manuscript for peer reviewed publication. The
publication process is completed after conducting poster
and oral presentations so that any feedback obtained can
be incorporated into the final manuscript. Writing
manuscripts using the scientific method is a teachable
skill. Scientific writing is formulaic, comprising of short
and concise simple sentences. Five principles of scientific
writing include: 1) clarity; 2) simplicity; 3) conciseness;
4) exactness, and 5) authenticity.2,3 Once the principal
investigator decides on the journal to submit to, the
manuscript should be tailored to that journal. Journals
should provide instructions for authors on their specific
formatting that should be followed before submission,
including word count limits. Original research articles
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 223

allow for word counts ranging from 2,000 to 5,000
words. Brief reports can limit word counts from 1,000 to
2,500 words. Letters to the editor are even shorter and
may be limited to 500 words. Review articles are usually
longer to allow for a comprehensive assessment of all
research addressing the topic of interest in the study.
11.4.1 MANUSCRIPT SECTIONS
Manuscripts usually start with a brief abstract and then
are usually structured using the following four sections:
1) introduction; 2) methods; 3) results; and 4) discussion
(IMRAD).4 As mentioned in the section on abstracts, this
IMRAD structure aligns with the processes of scientific
discovery and health research, which includes identifying
a study question (introduction), selecting the study
approach, designing the study and collecting data
(methods), analyzing data (results), and reporting findings
(discussion).1
Online platforms for journals allow for including
supplemental material to complement these sections.
However, not all journals follow this format. For example,
in the journal Innovation in Aging, the methods section
is replaced with b^@^\materials and methods.b^@^] Each section
usually requires subheadings to structure the material for
the reader. These subheadings may be required by the
journal but are usually designated by the authors. For
example, the introduction may include a subheading for
b^@^\literature review.b^@^] The results may include subheadings
for b^@^\selected characteristicsb^@^] or b^@^\bivariate analysis.b^@^]
Finally, the discussion may include a subheading for
b^@^\strengths and limitationsb^@^] or b^@^\conclusions.b^@^]
When writing research manuscripts, authors can
224 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

benefit from the use of writing checklists. These
checklists are sometimes required by journals. An
example is the Strengthening the Reporting of
Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE)
checklist which is used for writing observational
studies.13 The Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trial
(CONSORT) statement provides guidance for reporting
randomized clinical trials.14 The Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta Analyses
(PRISMA) statement is used for systematically and
accurately reporting reviews.15
11.4.1.a Abstract

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the abstract provides
a brief summary of the article. There is a need to ensure
consistency with the information in the abstract and the
text of the manuscript.4 The abstract can be the most
important part of the research article because it is the
first thing that readers will view prior to accessing and
reading full articles. While some full text articles require
fees or library access to obtain, abstracts are available on
the internet free to all readers. Abstracts may be written
before the final manuscript as an outline for what to
include in the formal paper. Another strategy is to write
the abstract after completing the paper so that the writer
can rephrase key points from the completed manuscript
that may be the most impactful to potential readers.
11.4.1.b Introduction

The introduction starts the manuscript. A common
framework used for developing an introduction section
for research projects using data from national health
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 225

surveys is an inverted pyramid or funnel approach (see
Figure 11.4). The funnel approach allows the writer to
describe the importance and rationale of the study from a
broad perspective and then narrow it down to its specific
aims.16 With this approach, the introduction is separated
into five sections that can be combined into 3 paragraphs
or left separate depending on the article type (e.g.,
original research or brief report) and the variables of
interest. The five sections include: 1) morbidity,
mortality, and health services use context; 2) social
determinants of health; 3) identification of exposure; 4)
gap in the literature; and 5) specific aims of the study.
Figure 11.4. Overview of introduction section funnel outline for
writing manuscripts using national health surveys

The first paragraph of the introduction should provide
the broad context of the outcome. Its purpose is to
contextualize the dependent variable or outcome. A
question that the writer might address could be: b^@^\what
is the morbidity and or mortality of the disease and
outcome under investigation?b^@^] Letb^@^Ys uses Alzheimerb^@^Ys
226 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

disease and related dementias (ADRD) as the outcome.
The writer may want to start the introduction by
highlighting the burden of ADRD in the United States
(over 6 million individuals), including the costs for
treatment (over $350 million per year).17 The second
paragraph for many public health research studies
focuses on social determinants of health. This paragraph
starts to narrow down the context of the outcome by
including details on the health disparities that exist as
they relate to race, ethnicity, sex, gender, age or other
social determinants of health. If ADRD is still our
example, we may want to include studies that
demonstrate differences in the prevalence of ADRD
among non Hispanic Black individuals compared to nonHispanic White individuals. The third paragraph focuses
on the exposure, or independent variable. It includes
details on the exposure that is being investigated and
what research has already been conducted on the
relationship between the exposure and outcome. For
studies looking at social determinants of health as an
exposure, this may be combined with the previous
paragraph. For example, if we look at racial and ethnic
disparities in the prevalence of ADRD, we may want to go
further and determine whether differences exist among
foreign born and US born racial and ethnic minority
groups since previous studies indicate that foreign born
individuals tend to have better health outcomes than their
US born counterparts. The fourth paragraph identifies
the gap in the literature on the relation between the
exposure and the outcome. The fifth paragraph outlines
the specific aims or objectives of the study. This may also
include the research questions or hypotheses depending
on the project and journal requirements.
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 227

11.4.1.c Methods

The methods section should include the details of how
the study was conducted and why the study was
conducted in a particular fashion. It should be written
in past tense since the methods have already been
conducted.18 The choice of active or passive voice when
writing is dependent on where the paper is submitted.
The methods section should provide enough detail that
anyone who wanted to replicate the study could do so.
This is particularly important when writing manuscripts
using public use data because any researcher could
download the data and run the same analysis but yield
different results. When writing articles using large data
sources, it is recommended that there are specific
subsections to describe the data source, participants,
variables, statistical analysis, and institutional review
board (IRB) approval process. It is recommended that the
writer writes the answers to these questions delineated
for each section in paragraph form.
Data Source

When reporting the results of a research study using
national data, it is important to identify the national
health survey that was used in the study. The years that
were combined or specific data files (e.g., sample adult
file for NHIS data or longitudinal file for MEPS data)
should also be reported. Since the details of each survey
have already been published on the survey website, this
section should only include brief details on the history
and purpose of the national health survey. The reader
should also be referred to the website for more details and
citations should be included for other studies that may
228 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

have used the same methodology to create the sample
with this data source. For example, Dallo and Kindratt
used restricted NHIS data for several studies using the
country of birth data from the NHIS. The original
manuscript published included more details on the data
sources and methods used19 and the later
studies20,21 included a reference to the original study
published. The level of details requested about the
national health survey used is dependent on the peer
reviewers and editor.
Participants

Based on the sampling frame, it is important to include
the total number of participants who completed the
national health survey used in the study. This section
should include the details describing how the sample was
limited based predetermined inclusion and exclusion
criteria. The total number of unweighted participants
that meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria should be
included. It may also be beneficial to the reader if the
total number of individuals that the unweighted sample
represents when weighted is included.
Variables

The variables (or measures) section should include details
on the questions used in your analysis to meet your study
aims. This section may include subsections for
independent variables (exposures or predictors),
dependent variables (disease or outcomes), and covariates
(including
confounders,
mediators,
and
other
explanatory factors) selected for inclusion in the
statistical analysis. Each section should include a
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 229

description of the questions collected by the national
health survey to gather data on each variable and ways
that the investigator has changed the variable by
combining it with other questions or removing missing
responses. If applicable, these sections should include
references to previous studies that have served as the
basis for recoding variables or adjusting for specific
covariates (e.g. confounders, other contributing factors)
during the statistical analysis. As many details about the
survey questions and response options should be
included in this section in order to alleviate the readers
concerns about potential information biases or concerns
about internal validity.
Statistical Analysis

The statistical analysis section should include details on
what analyses were conducted to meet the research aims.
This section should include: 1) basic descriptive statistical
procedures, such as frequencies, percentages, means and
standard deviations; 2) comparative (or bivariate)
statistical procedures, such as t tests or chi square tests;
and 3) inferential statistical procedures, such as
regression analyses. Specific information about the
weighting, stratification, and primary sampling units
used for national health surveys should be included. It is
common to cite the analytic guidelines for each specific
national health survey in this section, specifically if
changes have been made to these variables. The specific
analytical software should be included to ensure that the
proper procedures were used to account for the complex
sample design.

230 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Ethical Approval

Most scientific journals require a section or at least one
sentence on ethical approval. The secondary analysis of
public use data is not considered human subjects
research because the data extracted for analysis cannot be
identified by the researcher. However, some universities
require that research using public use data from national
health surveys go through a formal review process. These
studies are often deemed as the b^@^\exemptb^@^] classification.
11.4.1.d Results

The results section is the b^@^\heart,b^@^] or most important
section of the paper.22 It highlights the researchersb^@^Y
contribution to the scientific literature and overall
general knowledge in the public health field. The results
section should directly align with the objectives and
hypotheses presented in the introduction, the methods
outlined to meet those objectives in the methods section,
and a comparison to other studies in the discussion
section. Every research question in the introduction
section should have a delineated method and related
result. The results section should only present the main
findings but not interpret them in the context of other
literature.23
The results section includes a mixture of tables (figures,
if applicable) and text. It should include all findings
obtained while conducting the research study. At least
one paragraph should be included for each table
presented and tables should be referred to in the text. It
may be useful to use headings that are similar to the table
titles to direct the reader between the tables and text.
Depending on the journal the article is being submitted
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 231

to, authors may be requested to include a placeholder
(e.g., insert table 1 here) in the document that is submitted
for review. Results should be presented using at least two
tables describing 1) the demographics of the sample and
2) the main analytic results. Tables should be presented by
increasing complexity of the analysis (first demographics,
second bivariate analysis, last multivariate analysis) and
present large amounts of data in one place.22,23 Each table
should be able to stand alone with specific titles and
footnotes to describe its contents.
Table 1

The first table usually provides demographic information
about the sample. It may be presented with basic
frequencies and percentages or including bivariate
statistics that compare two groups. Key findings from
table 1 should be included in written form in the text.
Instead of including all of the results from the tables in
the text, the author may want to only highlight
statistically significant or clinically relevant results in the
text. Examples of potential tables shells are provided
below.

232 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Table 11.3.a. Table shell representing how to present basic
sample characteristics
Unweighted N
(%)

Weighted N
(%)

Race, Ethnicity and Nativity
US Born Non Hispanic Whites
Foreign born Non Hispanic Whites
Foreign born Arab Americans
Sex
Male
Female

Table 11.3.b. Table shell representing ways to present bivariate
analyses using sample characteristics

Flu Vaccine Last 12 months

No
% (SE)

Yes
% (SE)

p value

Race, Ethnicity and Nativity
US Born Non Hispanic
Whites
Foreign born Non Hispanic
Whites
Foreign born Arab Americans
Sex
Male
Female
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 233

Tables 2+

Table 2 and further tables include more complex
statistical analysis. Since many national health surveys
use cross sectional designs, prevalence estimates may be
calculated. Journal reviewers may be interested in seeing
prevalence estimates reported in an adjusted analysis,
such as the age  and sex  adjusted prevalence. These
results are obtained by calculating predicted marginals
using a LS MEANS statement with the regression
analyses. Results may be presented in a table similar to
Table 11.3.c, which demonstrates differences in age  and
sex adjusted prevalence estimates of cognitive health
outcomes by race, ethnicity, and nativity status.
Table 11.3.c. Table shell for age  and sex adjusted prevalence
estimates

US Born

Foreign Born

Alzheimerb^@^Ys disease and related
dementias (ADRD)
ADRD with comorbid diabetes
ADRD with comorbid hypertension

Regression models may also be used for determining
associations between the independent and dependent
variables of interest before and after adjusting for
covariates. Logistic, linear, multinomial, binomial, cox,
Poisson, or other regression models may be presented.
The explanations of each of these regressions models is
beyond the scope of this textbook. An example table shell
234 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

that may be used for logistic regression results is
presented in Table 11.3.d.
Table 11.3.d. Table shell for logistic regression results

Model 1
Crude
OR (95% CI)

Model 2
Adjusted for
demographics
OR (95% CI)

Model 3
Fully
Adjusted
OR (95% CI)

Race, Ethnicity and
Nativity
US Born
Non Hispanic Whites
Foreign born
Non Hispanic Whites
Foreign born Arab
Americans
*Include details of variables adjusted in footnotes underneath

Sensitivity Analysis

The methods and results sections may include details on
a sensitivity analysis. Sensitivity analyses are used to
determine whether a different model or set of
assumptions will yield similar results.24 For example, in
research evaluating foreign born Arab Americans using
NHIS data, studies by Dallo and colleagues have used data
from foreign born individuals born in the Middle East
to represent the Arab ethnicity.25,26 Recent efforts to
separate Arab Americans from non Hispanic Whites in
the US have recommended creating an inclusive racial 
ethnic category for Middle Eastern and North African
(MENA) populations.27 Kindratt and colleagues
expanded the formerly used Middle Eastern category to
include non Hispanic White Africans to represent
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 235

MENA individuals in a study evaluating cognitive
limitations.28 A sensitivity analysis was conducted to
compare results from using the new MENA variable with
results from using the Middle East only variable using
logistic regression models. The odds ratios and 95%
confidence intervals were overlapping, which indicated
that the results were similar.28 Results from a sensitivity
analysis are sometimes included in the manuscript or

included as supplementary material due to
limitations on word count and the number of
tables or figures allowed to be included with
the text.
11.4.1.e Discussion

The purpose of the discussion section is to interpret the
findings and provide meaning to the results in the context
of the other medical literature. The discussion section
should mirror the introduction section as a pyramid or
reverse funnel (See Figure 11.5). Instead of starting off
with the broad context and ending with a specific
purpose and objectives, the discussion section starts off
with specific results and expands to include the broader
context throughout the section. With this approach, the
discussion section is separated into four sections that can
be expanded to five or more paragraphs depending on
the article type (e.g., original research or brief report) and
the exposures and outcomes of interest. The five sections
include: 1) summary of the purpose and main findings; 2)
comparison of results to existing literature; 3) strengths
and limitations; and 4) conclusions and implications.

236 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Figure 11.5. Overview of discussion section pyramid outline for
writing manuscripts using national health surveys

The first paragraph of the discussion should restate the
purpose of the study then briefly summarize the main
findings. The implications of the main findings should
be expanded on in the next section. The second section
of the discussion should include a paragraph for each of
the most relevant findings with references to compare
and contrast the results with other studies. This section
should include reasons why the results may be the same
or different from other literature. The third section of
the discussion should acknowledge the strengths and
limitations of the study. For example, some strengths of
studies using national health surveys may be that the
sample was selected using a probability based sample
design versus a convenience sample. A strength may also
be a large sample size. National health surveys also have
many different content areas that allow for a broad
assessment of other potential contributing factors related
to the research question. Despite these strengths, there
will also be limitations that need to be noted. For
example, some limitations may include that the survey
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 237

uses a cross sectional design and causation cannot be
established. Since the independent and dependent
variables were measured at the same time, there may be
no way of determining whether the independent variable
(exposure) causes the dependent variable (disease 
outcome). There may also be information biases with selfreported data. For example, a limitation of self reported
data for cancer screenings is that the data may
overrepresent or underrepresent screening estimates.
Self reported data may not be as accurate as other
measures such as electronic medical records. The final
paragraph of the discussion section is a conclusion. The
conclusion should discuss the generalizability of the
results and the impact the findings may have on potential
interventions and policies. The manuscript should end
with the b^@^\take home messageb^@^] from the research and
provide future directions and recommendations.
11.5 WRITING TIPS AND TRICKS
Here are some writing tips and tricks that may be useful.
b^@" Start with the results section, then write the
methods section. You may want to create your
tables or figures first, then write 1 2 sentences
about them.23 By creating the tables and writing
the results first, the introduction and discussion
sections can be framed around the key findings.
b^@" Select a similar article to use as a model for
writing. If there is already an article published
with the same dataset in the journal you plan to
submit to, use it as a model for structuring your
paper.
238 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

b^@" If you wrote a grant proposal or IRB protocol, use
the same information to start writing your paper.
The proposals were probably written in future
tense (e.g., b^@^\we will analyzeb^@^] or b^@^\the data will be
analyzedb^@^]) so change it to past tense (e.g., b^@^\we
analyzedb^@^] or b^@^\the data were analyzedb^@^]).
b^@" If you are unclear whether someone from the
team qualifies as an author, check to see if they
meet the ICJME guidelines on authorship.4 If you
have co authors, make sure they are contributing
to the manuscript and you are not doing
everything yourself.
b^@" Use a referencing software like Endnote or Zotero
to manage your in text citations and references at
the end of the paper.
b^@" When all else fails, hand write your manuscript on
a piece of paper b^@^S not type it.
11.6 SUMMARY
In summary, this chapter provided an in depth overview
of disseminating research by presentation and
publication. Dissemination is the final step in the
research process and is essential when conducting
research using national health surveys. Several examples
have been provided to demonstrate different types of
presentations created and sections of manuscripts
written by the primary author of this textbook.

244 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

CHAPTER 12.

CONCLUSIONS

12.1 OVERVIEW
This textbook sought to train future public health
professionals, specifically Master of Public Health (MPH)
students, how to conduct basic applied data analysis using
secondary data collected from national health surveys.
The goal was to eliminate gaps in knowledge, skills and
analytical abilities that may prohibit MPH graduates
from being successful in entry level public health practice
and research focused positions. A brief recap of what was
covered in each chapter of this textbook is provided in the
following sections. Results from each of the case studies
covered in Chapters 6 10 are also provided.
12.2 INTRODUCTION AND BASIC APPLIED
DATA ANALYSIS RECAP
The first section included three chapters. Chapter 1
provided an overview of the textbook by outlining its
purpose to train future public health professionals in the
knowledge and skills to conduct applied secondary data
analysis using national health surveys. Chapter 2
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 245

provided a general overview of the surveys used for the
case studies presented in this textbook, including the
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) in Chapter 6,
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) in Chapter
7, Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS)
in Chapter 8, Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System
(BRFSS) in Chapter 9, and the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) in Chapter 10.
Chapter 3 included a literature review of previous studies
that have used national health surveys to answer public
health and health services research related research
questions.
The second section included two chapters. Chapter 4
reviewed basic statistical functions commonly used for
public health research questions. While this textbook was
written for learners with some background knowledge of
research methods and epidemiologic study designs, this
chapter included basic terminology on types of data
collected, descriptive (frequencies percentages, means 
standard deviations) and analytical statistical procedures
(chi square, logistic regression) used for analysis of
national health surveys. Chapter 5 included details on
additional survey design features needed to be considered
when analyzing complex surveys, including weights,
primary sampling units, and stratum variables. Data from
the NHIS were used for SAS programming examples in
these chapters.

12.3 NATIONAL HEALTH INTERVIEW SURVEY
(NHIS) RECAP
Chapter 6 covered the background and details on how to
246 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

obtain and analyze NHIS data. The objective of the NHIS
case study was to explore whether Arab American adults
were more or less likely to receive an annual flu vaccine in
comparison to other racial ethnic groups, such as other
non Hispanic Whites using 2018 person and sample
adult files. The following specific aims were examined
using chi square tests and logistic regression analyses.
b^@" Aim 6.1: Compare socioeconomic and healthrelated characteristics of Arab Americans
compared to US born and foreign born nonHispanic Whites from Europe and Russia
(including former USSR countries)
b^@" Aim 6.2: Determine associations between region
of birth and flu vaccine uptake among Arab
Americans compared to US born non Hispanic
Whites
Table 12.1 provides results from the chi square tests used
to meet specific aim 6.1. Unweighted frequencies and
weighted percentages are presented. There were
statistically significant differences in flu vaccine uptake
by region of birth, age, sex, and highest level of education
among non Hispanic Whites (all pb^@^Ys<.05). Adults who had
a flu vaccine in the last 12 months were more likely to be
US born, ages 35 54 years, female, and have a bachelorb^@^Ys
degree or higher level of education.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 247

TABLE 12.1. SOCIODEMOGRAPHIC
CHARACTERISTICS OF NON HISPANIC WHITE
ADULTS IN THE US BY FLU VACCINE UPTAKE
IN THE LAST 12 MONTHS, NHIS 2018
No
N(%)

Yes
N(%)

Region of birth among non Hispanic Whites

p value
.0476

United States

18,303 (95.9)

17,436 (96.9)

Europe Russia

513 (3.0)

406 (2.4)

Arab Middle East

182 (1.1)

90 (0.7)

Age

<.0001

18 34 years

10,109 (39.4)

5,004 (25.1)

35 54 years

13,270 (40.9)

8,508 (34.5)

55 64 years

4,316 (11.7)

4,318 (16.7)

65+ years

3,844 (8.0)

8,292 (23.7)

Sex

<.0001

Male

15,127 (51.3)

10,774 (43.7)

Female

16,412 (48.7)

15,348 (56.3)

Highest level of education

<.0001

<High school

9,526 (32.9)

6,209 (26.5)

High school diploma or
GED

5,734 (20.0)

4,378 (17.8)

Some college or Associate
degree

7,387 (25.3)

6,011 (24.4)

Bachelorb^@^Ys degree or
higher

6,829 (21.8)

8,020 (31.3)

Table 12.2 provides results from logistic regression
analyses used for meeting specific aim 6.2. Odds ratios
(OR) and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI)
are presented. The reference group is US born non248 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Hispanic Whites. In the unadjusted model, foreign born
Arab Americans had 0.65 times lower odds of receiving
a flu vaccine in the past 12 months compared to USborn Whites. However, because the confidence interval
crosses the line of no effect at 1.00, the comparison is not
statistically significant (95% CI=0.39, 1.10). This result
differs from non Hispanic Whites from Europe Russia
who had 0.78 times lower odds (95% CI=0.62, 0.97) of
reporting a flu vaccine compared to US born nonHispanic Whites. For Arab Americans, results were
statistically significantly different than US born nonHispanic Whites in the adjusted model (Model 2). After
adjusting for age, sex, and education, foreign born Arab
Americans had 0.55 times lower odds (95% CI=0.32, 0.94)
of reporting a flu vaccine in the past 12 months compared
to US born non Hispanic Whites. The odds were lower
than foreign born non Hispanic Whites from Europe 
Russia (OR=0.55 Arab compared to OR=0.69 Europe 
Russia) and results were statistically significantly lower
than US born non Hispanic Whites. This result
highlights the need to separate Arab American
individuals from other non Hispanic Whites so that their
health outcomes are not masked under the White racial
group.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 249

TABLE 12.2. CRUDE AND MULTIVARIABLE
LOGISTIC REGRESSION RESULTS, NHIS 2018
Model 1
Unadjusted
OR (95% CI)

Model 2
Adjusted for age, sex,
and
education
OR (95% CI)

Region of birth among non Hispanic Whites
United States

1.00

1.00

Europe Russia

0.78 (0.62, 0.97)

0.69 (0.55, 0.86)

Arab Middle East

0.65 (0.39, 1.10)

0.55 (0.32, 0.94)

12.4 MEDICAL EXPENDITURE PANEL SURVEY
(MEPS) RECAP
Chapter 7 covered the background and details on how
to obtain and analyze MEPS data. The objective of the
MEPS case study was to explore whether adults who
perceived their physician provided quality patientprovider communication (PPC) were more or less likely
to receive an annual flu vaccine in comparison to those
who did not receive quality PPC using household level
in person and self administered questionnaire data. The
following specific aims were examined using chi square
tests and logistic regression analyses.
b^@" Aim 7.1: Compare sociodemographic and healthrelated characteristics of adults by influenza
vaccine uptake
b^@" Aim 7.2: Determine association between adultsb^@^Y
perceptions of PPC qualities and their likelihood
of receiving an influenza vaccine before and after
controlling for covariates
250 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Two PPC qualities that were examined in this case study
were whether instructions given to patients were easy for
them to understand and whether the health care provider
asked the patient to b^@^\teach back,b^@^] or describe how they
will follow the instructions given to them. Table 12.3
provides results from the chi square tests used to meet
specific aim 7.1. Unweighted frequencies and weighted
percentages are presented. There were no statistically
significant differences in flu vaccine uptake for either
PPC quality evaluated. However, there were statistically
significant differences in flu vaccine uptake by age and
race ethnicity (both pb^@^Ys<.0001). Adults who did not
receive a flu vaccine in the last 12 months were more
likely to be younger (ages 18 44 years). Non Hispanic
Black and Hispanic adults had higher estimates of not
receiving a flu vaccine compared to non Hispanic White
adults and non Hispanic adults of other or multiple races,
inclusive of non Hispanic Asians.

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 251

TABLE 12.3. PATIENT PROVIDER
COMMUNICATION QUALITIES AND
SOCIODEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS BY
FLU VACCINE UPTAKE IN THE LAST 12
MONTHS IN THE US, MEPS 2015 2016
Flu vaccine in last 12
months
No
N(%)

Yes
N(%)

Instructions provided easy to understand

p value

.8679

Not Always

2,049 (31.1)

2,462 (30.9)

Always

4,226 (68.9)

5,088 (69.1)

Asked to describe how you will follow instructions
Not Always

4,105 (69.0)

5,003 (69.7)

Always

2,156 (31.0)

2,529 (30.3)

Age

.4991

<.0001

18 44 years

10,107 (55.6)

4,740 (33.2)

45 64 years

5,937 (33.9)

4,765 (34.4)

65+ years

1,731 (10.5)

4,231(32.4)

Race Ethnicity

<.0001

Hispanic

5,774 (18.6)

3,238 (12.5)

Non Hispanic White

6,738 (59.6)

6,611 (68.7)

Non Hispanic Black

3,569 (13.2)

2,338 (9.7)

Non Hispanic Other
(including Asian Multiple)

1,694 (8.6)

1,549 (9.1)

Table 12.4 provides results from the logistic regression
results used to meet specific aim 7.2. Odds ratios (OR)
and the corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) are
presented. The reference group are those who did b^@^\not
alwaysb^@^] perceive their health care provider exhibited each
252 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

PPC quality. In the unadjusted models, there were no
statistically significant differences between adults who
perceived their health care provider always provided
instructions that were easy to understand or asked them
to describe how they will follow instructions with those
who did not. Results remained statistically insignificant
after adjusting for age and race ethnicity for both PPC
qualities. All logistic regression results were not
statistically significant because the 95% confidence
intervals cross the line of no effect at 1.00.
Table 12.4. Crude and multivariable logistic regression results,
MEPS 2015 2016
Model 2
Adjusted for age and
race ethnicity
OR (95% CI)

Model 1
Unadjusted
OR (95% CI)

Instructions provided were easy to understand
Not Always
Always

1.00

1.00

1.01 (0.92, 1.10)

1.06 (0.96, 1.16)

Asked to describe how you will follow instructions (teach back)
Not Always
Always

1.00

1.00

0.97 (0.88, 1.07)

1.03 (0.93, 1.14)

12.5 HEALTH INFORMATION NATIONAL
TRENDS SURVEY (HINTS) RECAP
Chapter 8 covered the background and details on how
to obtain and analyze HINTS data. The objective of the
HINTS case study was to explore associations between
e mail PPC and colon cancer screening uptake using
HINTS 5 Cycle 3 data. The following specific aims were

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 253

examined using chi square tests and logistic regression
analyses.
b^@" Aim 8.1: Compare sociodemographic and healthrelated characteristics of adults who use e mail to
communicate with their health care provider
b^@" Aim 8.2: Determine associations between e mail
PPC and adultsb^@^Y likelihood of receiving a colon
cancer screening before and after controlling for
covariates
Table 12.5 provides results from the chi square tests used
to meet specific aim 8.1. Unweighted frequencies and
weighted percentages are presented. There were no
statistically significant differences in colon cancer
screening uptake among adults who did and did not use
e mail to communicate with their health care provider.
Furthermore, there were no statistically significant
differences by gender. Older adults (ages 60 69 years and
ages 70+ years) were more likely to receive a colon cancer
screening than adults ages 50 59 years (p<.0001).

254 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

TABLE 12.5. E MAIL PPC AND
SOCIODEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS BY
COLON CANCER SCREENING UPTAKE IN THE
LAST 12 MONTHS IN THE US, HINTS 5 CYCLE 3
Colon cancer screening in
last 12 months
No
N(%)

Yes
N(%)

Communicate with health care provider by e mail
No

1,097 (55.2)

1,853 (57.8)

Yes

886 (44.8)

1,342 (42.2)

Gender
Male
Female

p value

.2261

.3134
767 (50.3)

1,316 (48.1)

1,097 (49.7)

1,676 (51.9)

Age

<.0001

50 59 years

305 (69.1)

717 (38.0)

60 69 years

163 (18.9)

1,077 (32.0)

70+ years

131 (12.0)

1,166 (30.0)

Table 12.6 provides results from the logistic regression
analyses used to meet specific aim 8.2. Odds ratios (OR)
and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) are
presented. The reference group includes those who did
not communicate with their health care provider by email. In the unadjusted model, there were no statistically
significant differences in colon cancer screening among
adults who did and did not use e mail to communicate
with their health care provider. Results were not
statistically significant because the 95% confidence
intervals cross the line of no effect at 1.00. However,
adults who used e mail to communicate with their health
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 255

care provider had 2.15 times greater odds (95% CI=1.45,
3.19) of receiving a colon cancer screening after adjusting
for gender and age.
Table 12.6. Crude and multivariable logistic regression results,
HINTS 5 Cycle 3
Model 1
Unadjusted
OR (95% CI)

Model 2
Adjusted for gender
and age
OR (95% CI)

Communicate with health care provider by e mail
No

1.00

1.00

Yes

0.90 (0.76, 1.07)

2.15 (1.45, 3.19)

12.6 BEHAVIORAL RISK FACTOR SURVEILLANCE
SYSTEM (BRFSS) RECAP
Chapter 9 covered the background and details on how
to obtain and analyze BRFSS data. The objective of the
BRFSS case study was to explore whether differences in
Alzheimerb^@^Ys disease and related dementia (ADRD)
caregiving experiences among urban (metro) and rural
(non metro) adults in Texas were moderated by race and
ethnicity. The differences obtained among metro and
non metro adults reported collectively were stratified by
racial and ethnic groups. Data from the 2019 BRFSS were
used to fulfil the aims. The following specific aims were
examined using chi square tests and logistic regression
analyses.
b^@" Aim 9.1. Determine whether ADRD caregiving
experiences differ across metro and non metro
geographic contexts among adults in Texas
256 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

b^@" Aim 9.2. Determine whether the relationship
between geographic context and ADRD
caregiving experiences is moderated by the
caregiverb^@^Ys race ethnicity among metro and nonmetro adults in Texas
Table 12.7 provides results from the chi square tests used
to meet specific aim 9.1. Unweighted frequencies and
weighted percentages are presented. There were no
statistically significant differences in race ethnicity,
caregiver sex, caregiver relationship to care recipient or
caregiver employment status by geographic context,
among metro and non metro ADRD caregivers (all
pb^@^Ys>.05).

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 257

TABLE 12.7. SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF
ADRD CAREGIVERS BY GEOGRAPHIC CONTEXT,
BRFSS 2019
Care Recipient Geographic
Context
Metro
N (weighted %)

Non Metro
N (weighted %)

Race Ethnicity

p value

0.2318

Non Hispanic White
(Majority group)

142 (49.2)

60 (69.42)

Other Races (All minority
groups)

79 (50.8)

14 (30.58)

Caregiver Sex

0.2986

Male

65 (35.9)

22 (48.88)

Female

156 (64.1)

52 (51.12)

Caregiver Relationship to Care Recipient

0.1021

Mother, Father, In laws

80 (39.66)

30 (50.84)

Child

24 (11.37)

5 (1.11)

Husband, wife, live in
partner

33 (9.79)

16 (22.16)

Other relative

40 (24.21)

11 (13.50)

Non relative family
friend

42 (14.96)

11 (12.39)

Caregiver Employment Status

0.1039

Employed

98 (60.65)

27 (39.80)

Retired

71 (18.84)

33 (41.22)

Table 12.8 provides results from the logistic regression
analyses used to meet specific aim 9.2 among nonHispanic Whites (the majority group). Odds ratios (OR)
and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) are
presented. The reference group includes those whose
258 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

care recipient lives in a metro (urban) area. There were
no statistically significant differences in household or
personal caregiving experiences among non Hispanic
White ADRD caregivers from metro and non metro
geographic contexts. All logistic regression results were
not statistically significant because the 95% confidence
intervals cross the line of no effect at 1.00.
Table 12.8. Crude and adjusted logistic regression results for
non Hispanic White ADRD caregivers, BRFSS 2019 Texas
Model 1
Unadjusted
OR (95% CI)

Model 2
Adjusted for sex,
work, relationship
OR (95% CI)

Household Caregiving Experiences
Geographic Context
Metro
Non Metro

1.00

1.00

0.92 (0.26, 3.17)

0.72 (0.22, 2.34)

Personal Caregiving Experiences
Geographic Context
Metro
Non Metro

1.00

1.00

2.26 (0.76, 6.71)

1.91 (0.59, 6.17)

Table 12.9 provides results from the logistic regression
analyses used to meet specific aim 9.2 among caregivers
from minority groups, including non Hispanic Blacks,
Hispanics, non Hispanic Asians, and all others. Odds
ratios (OR) and the corresponding 95% confidence
intervals (CI) are presented. The reference group includes
those whose care recipient lives in a metro (urban) area.
There were no statistically significant differences in
household or personal caregiving experiences among
minority ADRD caregivers from metro and non metro
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 259

geographic contexts. All logistic regression results were
not statistically significant because the 95% confidence
intervals cross the line of no effect at 1.00.
Table 12.9. Crude and adjusted logistic regression results for
minority ADRD caregivers, BRFSS 2019 Texas
Model 1
Unadjusted
OR (95% CI)

Model 2
Adjusted for sex,
work, relationship
OR (95% CI)

Household Caregiving Experiences
Geographic Context
Metro
Non Metro

1.00

1.00

5.82 (0.73, 46.59)

3.05 (0.09, 103.33)

Personal Caregiving Experiences
Geographic Context
Metro
Non Metro

1.00

1.00

9.80 (0.98, 97.73)

3.73 (0.32, 43.15)

12.7 NATIONAL HEALTH AND NUTRITION
EXAMINATION SURVEY (NHANES) RECAP
Chapter 10 covered the background and details on how
to obtain and analyze NHANES data. The objective of the
NHANES case study was to determine racial and ethnic
differences in sedentary behavior guideline adherence
among US  and foreign born Hispanics, non Hispanic
Whites, non Hispanic Blacks, and non Hispanic Asians.
Data from the NHANES 2017 March 2020 prepandemic data files were used to fulfil the aims. The
following specific aims were examined using chi square
tests and logistic regression analyses.
260 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

b^@" Aim 10.1: Compare the prevalence of adherence
to 24 hour sedentary behavior guidelines in US
adults by race, ethnicity, and nativity status
b^@" Aim 10.2: Determine associations between race,
ethnicity, and nativity and sedentary guideline
adherence among racially and ethnically diverse
foreign born adults compared to their US born
counterparts
Table 12.10 provides results from the chi square tests
used to meet specific aim 10.1. Unweighted frequencies
and weighted percentages are presented. There were
statistically significant differences in sedentary guideline
adherence by nativity status among non Hispanic Black
and Hispanic adults. Fewer foreign born non Hispanic
Black adults were adherent to sedentary behavior
guidelines than US born non Hispanic Black adults
(p=.0127). However, the pattern differed among Hispanic
adults. More foreign born Hispanic adults were adherent
to sedentary behavior guidelines compared to US born
Hispanic adults (p=.0003). There were no statistically
significant differences among non Hispanic Whites or
Asian adults by nativity status (both pb^@^Ys>.05). There were
no differences by age or gender. However, there was a
statistically significant difference in sedentary guideline
adherence by BMI (p<.0001).

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 261

TABLE 12.10. SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF
ADULTS BY 24 HOUR MOVEMENT SEDENTARY
GUIDELINE ADHERENCE, NHANES 2017 MARCH
2020 PRE PANDEMIC DATA

262 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Sedentary Behavior Guideline
Not adherent
N (Weighted %)

Adherent
N (Weighted
%)

Non Hispanic White
US born White
Foreign born White

.2880
1,078 (95.7)

2,125 (94.4)

44 (4.3)

96 (5.6)

Non Hispanic Black
US born Black
Foreign born Black

.0127
665 (91.5)

1,639 (88.7)

56 (8.5)

169 (11.3)

Hispanic

.0003

US born Hispanic

205 (62.8)

601 (38.7)

Foreign born Hispanic

147 (37.2)

1149 (61.3)

Non Hispanic Asian

.7071

US born Asian

56 (15.4)

94 (14.4)

Foreign born Asian

315 (84.6)

698 (85.6)

Age
18 64 years
65+ years

.0727
2,051 (81.3)

5,177 (78.9)

666 (18.7)

1,716 (21.1)

Gender

.4735

Male

1,312 (47.6)

3,374 (48.7)

Female

1,405 (52.4)

3,519 (51.3)

BMI

<.0001

<25.00 BMI

524 (22.0)

1,558 (26.4)

25.00 29.99 BMI

701 (28.2)

2,045 (34.0)

1,164 (49.8)

2,487 (39.6)

30.00+ BMI

p value

Table 12.11 provides results from the logistic regression
analyses used to meet specific aim 10.2. Odds ratios (OR)
and the corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) are
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 263

presented. There were no differences in sedentary
guideline adherence by nativity status among nonHispanic White or Asian adults. Foreign born nonHispanic Black had 1.37 times higher odds (95% CI=1.09,
1.71) of meeting sedentary behavior guidelines compared
to US born non Hispanic Black adults in the unadjusted
model. Results remained statistically significant after
adjusting for age, gender, and BMI (OR=1.32; 95%
CI=1.03, 1.69). Similar results were found for Hispanic
adults. Hispanic adults had 2.67 times higher odds (95%
CI=1.93, 3.70) of meeting sedentary behavior guidelines
compared to US born Hispanic adults in the unadjusted
model. The odds increased to 2.85 (95% CI=2.02, 4.02) in
the adjusted model.

264 TIFFANY B. KINDRATT

Table 12.11. Unadjusted and adjusted logistic regression results,
NHANES 2017 March 2020 pre pandemic data
Model 1
Unadjusted
OR (95% CI)

Model 2
Adjusted for
age, gender, BMI
OR (95% CI)

1.00

1.00

1.31 (0.78, 2.22)

1.35 (0.82, 2.21)

1.00

1.00

1.37 (1.09, 1.71)

1.32 (1.03, 1.69)

1.00

1.00

2.67 (1.93, 3.70)

2.85 (2.02, 4.02)

1.00

1.00

1.08 (0.70, 1.67)

0.96 (0.59, 1.54)

Race, Ethnicity, Nativity Status
Non Hispanic White
US born White
Foreign born White
Non Hispanic Black
US born Black
Foreign born Black
Hispanic
US born Hispanic
Foreign born Hispanic
Non Hispanic Asian
US born Asian
Foreign born Asian

12.8 DISSEMINATION RECAP
Chapter 11 covers the dissemination of research studies
using secondary data from national health surveys. It
includes details on how to disseminate results by
abstracts,
presentations,
and
original
research
manuscripts. Examples of poster presentations are
provided as well as a thorough overview of writing each
section of scientific manuscripts (Abstract, Introduction,
Methods, Results, Discussion).

BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY 265

12.9 SUMMARY
The examples used in this textbook stem from previous
studies and the current research laboratory focus of its
primary author, Tiffany Kindratt, PhD, MPH. There is
a wide range of research topics covered that may be of
interest for undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral level
students interested in national health surveys. Since all
of the examples include SAS statistical software, future
versions of this textbook and companion files will take
into account other statistical software programs.

